=== Page 1 ===
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE Brought to you by FlyHeart
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE
Stephen R. Covey

=== Page 2 ===
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE Brought to you by FlyHeart
Stephen Covey has written a remarkable book about the human condition, so elegantly written, so
understanding of our embedded concerns, so useful for our organization and personal lives, that it's
going to be my gift to everyone I know.
-- Warren Bennis, author of On Becoming a Leader
I've never known any teacher or mentor on improving personal effectiveness to generate such an
overwhelmingly positive reaction.... This book captures beautifully Stephen's philosophy of principles.
I think anyone reading it will quickly understand the enormous reaction I and others have had to Dr.
Covey's teachings.
-- John Pepper, President, Procter and Gamble
Stephen Covey is an American Socrates, opening your mind to the 'permanent things' -- values,
family, relationships, communicating.
-- Brian Tracy, author of Psychology of Achievement
Stephen R. Covey's book teaches with power, conviction, and feeling. Both the content and the
methodology of these principles form a solid foundation for effective communication. As an educator,
I think this book to be a significant addition to my library.
-- William Rolfe Kerr, Utah Commissioner of Higher Education
Few students of management and organization -- and people -- have thought as long and hard about
first principles as Stephen Covey. In The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People, he offers us an
opportunity, not a how-to guide. The opportunity is to explore ourselves and our impact on others,
and to do so by taking advantage of his profound insights. It is a wonderful book that could change
your life.
-- Tom Peters, author of In Search of Excellence
The ethical basis for human relations in this book defines a way of life, not just a methodology for
succeeding at business. That it works is apparent.
-- Bruce L. Christensen, President, Public Broadcasting Service
At a time when American organizations desperately need to energize people and produce leaders at
all levels, Covey provides an empowering philosophy for life that is also the best guarantee of success
in business...a perfect blend of wisdom, compassion, and practical experience.
-- Rosabeth Moss Kanter, editor of the Harvard Business Review and author of When Giants Learn to Dance
I have learned so much from Stephen Covey over the years that every time I sit down to write, I'm
worried about subconscious plagiarism! Seven Habits is not pop psychology or trendy self-help. It is
solid wisdom and sound principles.
-- Richard M. Eyre, author of Life Balance and Teaching Children Values
We could do well to make the reading and use of this book a requirement for anyone at any level of
public service. It would be far more effective than any legislation regarding ethical conduct.
-- Senator Jake Garn, first senator in space
When Stephen Covey talks, executives listen.
-- Dun's Business Month

=== Page 3 ===
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE Brought to you by FlyHeart
Stephen Covey's inspirational book will undoubtedly be the psychology handbook of the '90s. The
principles discussed are universal and can be applied to every aspect of life. These principles,
however, are like an opera. They cannot simply be performed, they must be rehearsed!
-- Ariel Bybee, mezzo-soprano, Metropolitan Opera
I found this book stimulating and thought-provoking. In fact, I keep referring to it.
-- Richard M. DeVos, President, Amway
Winning is a habit. So is losing. Twenty-five years of experience, thought, and research have
convinced Covey that seven habits distinguish the happy, healthy, successful from those who fail or
who must sacrifice meaning and happiness for success in the narrow sense.
-- Ron Zemke, coauthor of The Service Edge and Service America
Stephen R. Covey is a marvelous human being. He writes insightfully and he cares about people.
The equivalent of an entire library of success literature is found in this one volume. The principles he
teaches in The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People have made a real difference in my life.
-- Ken Blanchard, Ph.D., author of The One-Minute Manager
The Seven Habits are keys to success for people in all walks of life. It is very thought-provoking.
-- Edward A. Brennan, Chairman, President and CEO, Sears, Roebuck and Company
Covey validates the durable truths as they apply to family, business, and society in general, sparing
us the psycho-babble that pollutes so much of current literature on human relations. His book is not a
photograph, but a process, and should be treated as such. He is neither an optimist nor a pessimist,
but a possibilist, who believes that we and we alone can open the door to change within ourselves.
There are many more than seven good reasons to read this book.
-- Steve Labunski, Executive Director, International Radio and Television Society
Knowledge is the quickest and safest path to success in any area of life. Stephen Covey has
encapsulated the strategies used by all those who are highly effective. Success can be learned and this
book is a highly effective way to learn it.
-- Charles Givens, President, Charles J. Givens Organization, Inc., author of Wealth Without Risk
I know of no one who has contributed more to helping leaders in our society than Stephen R.
Covey.... There is no literate person in our society who would not benefit by reading this book and
applying its principles
-- Senator Orrin G. Hatch
One of the greatest habits you can develop is to learn and internalize the wisdom of Stephen Covey.
He lives what he says and this book can help you live, permanently, in the "Winner's Circle."
-- Dr. Denis Waitley, author of The Psychology of Winning
It's powerful reading. His principles of vision, leadership, and human relations make it a practical
teaching tool for business leaders today. I highly recommend it.
-- Nolan Archibald, President and CEO, Black and Decker

=== Page 4 ===
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE Brought to you by FlyHeart
The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People suggests a discipline for our personal dealings with
people which would be undoubtedly valuable if people stopped to think about it.
-- James C. Fletcher, Director, NASA
A wonderful contribution. Dr. Covey has synthesized the habits of our highest achievers and
presented them in a powerful, easy-to-use program. We now have a blueprint for opening the
American mind.
-- Charles Garfield, author of Peak Performer
Seven Habits is an exceptional book. It does a better job of inspiring a person to integrate the
different responsibilities in one's life -- personal, family, and professional -- than any other book I have
read.
-- Paul H. Thompson, Dean, Marriott School of Management, BYU and author of Novation
Goodbye, Dale Carnegie. Stephen Covey has had a profound influence on my life. His principles
are powerful. They work. Buy this book. Read, it, and as you live the principles your life will be
enriched.
-- Robert G. Allen, author of Creating Wealth and Nothing Down
In the '90s America needs to unlock the door to increased productivity both on a business and
personal basis. The best way to accomplish this goal is through enhancing the human resource. Dr.
Covey's Seven Habits provides the guidelines for this to happen. These principles make great sense and
are right on target for the time.
-- F.G. "Buck" Rodgers, author of The IBM Way
This book is filled with practical wisdom for people who want to take control of their lives, their
business and their careers. Each time I read a section again I get new insights, which suggests the
messages are fundamental and deep.
-- Gifford Pinchot III, author of Intrapreneuring
Most of my learning has come from modeling after other people and what they do. Steve's book
helps energize this modeling process through highly effective research and examples.
-- Fran Tarkenton, NFL Hall of Fame quarterback
Not only does the "character ethic" win hands down every time over the "personality ethic" in the
battle of effectiveness, it also will bring greater fulfillment and joy to individuals seeking meaning in
their personal and professional lives.
-- Larry Wilson, author of Changing the Game: The New Way to Sell
Fundamentals are the key to success. Stephen Covey is a master of them. Buy this book, but most
importantly, use it!
-- Anthony Robbins, author of Unlimited Power
This book contains the kind of penetrating truth about human nature that is usually found only in
fiction. At the end, you will feel not only that you know Covey, but also that he knows you
-- Orson Scott Card, winner of the Hugo and Nebula Awards

=== Page 5 ===
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE Brought to you by FlyHeart
Stephen Covey adds great value to any individual or organization, not just through his words. His
vision and integrity -- his personal example -- move people beyond mere success.
-- Tom F. Crum, cofounder, The Windstar Foundation, and author of The Magic of Conflict
With all the responsibilities and demands of time, travel, work, and families placed upon us in
today's competitive world, it's a big plus to have Stephen Covey's The Seven Habits of Highly Effective
People to refer to.
-- Marie Osmond
In The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People, Stephen Covey serves up a seven-course meal on
how to take control of one's life and become the complete, fulfilling person one envisions. It is a
satisfying, energetic, step-by-step book that is applicable for personal and business progress.
-- Roger Staubach, NFL Hall of Fame quarterback
The conclusions he draws in this book underscore the need to restore the character ethic in our
society. This work is a valuable addition to the literature of self-help.
-- W. Clement Stone, founder, Success Magazine
Stephen Covey's deliberate integration of life and principles leads to squaring inner thought and
outward behavior, resulting in personal as well as public integrity.
-- Gregory J. Newell, U.S. Ambassador to Sweden

=== Page 6 ===
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE Brought to you by FlyHeart
Part One
Paradigms and Principles
INSIDE-OUT
There is no real excellence in all this world which can be separated from right living
-- David Starr Jordan
* * *
In more than 25 years of working with people in business, university, and marriage and family
settings, I have come in contact with many individuals who have achieved an incredible degree of
outward success, but have found themselves struggling with an inner hunger, a deep need for personal
congruency and effectiveness and for healthy, growing relationships with other people.
I suspect some of the problems they have shared with me may be familiar to you.
I've set and met my career goals and I'm having tremendous professional success. But it's cost me
my personal and family life. I don't know my wife and children anymore. I'm not even sure I know
myself and what's really important to me. I've had to ask myself -- is it worth it?
I've started a new diet -- for the fifth time this year. I know I'm overweight, and I really want to
change. I read all the new information, I set goals, I get myself all psyched up with a positive mental
attitude and tell myself I can do it. But I don't. After a few weeks, I fizzle. I just can't seem to keep a
promise I make to myself.
I've taken course after course on effective management training. I expect a lot out of my employees
and I work hard to be friendly toward them and to treat them right. But I don't feel any loyalty from
them. I think if I were home sick for a day, they'd spend most of their time gabbing at the water
fountain. Why can't I train them to be independent and responsible -- or find employees who can be?
My teenage son is rebellious and on drugs. No matter what I try, he won't listen to me. What can
I do?
There's so much to do. And there's never enough time. I feel pressured and hassled all day, every
day, seven days a week. I've attended time management seminars and I've tried half a dozen different
planning systems. They've helped some, but I still don't feel I'm living the happy, productive, peaceful
life I want to live.
I want to teach my children the value of work. But to get them to do anything, I have to supervise
every move; and put up with complaining every step of the way. It's so much easier to do it myself.
Why can't children do their work cheerfully and without being reminded?
I'm busy -- really busy. But sometimes I wonder if what I'm doing will make a difference in the
long run. I'd really like to think there was meaning in my life, that somehow things were different
because I was here.
I see my friends or relatives achieve some degree of success or receive some recognition, and I smile
and congratulate them enthusiastically. But inside, I'm eating my heart out. Why do I feel this way?
I have a forceful personality. I know, in almost any interaction, I can control the outcome. Most of
the time, I can even do it by influencing others to come up with the solution I want. I think through
each situation and I really feel the ideas I come up with are usually the best for everyone. But I feel
uneasy. I always wonder what other people really think of me and my ideas.
My marriage has gone flat. We don't fight or anything; we just don't love each other anymore.
We've gone to counseling; we've tried a number of things, but we just can't seem to rekindle the feeling

=== Page 7 ===
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE Brought to you by FlyHeart
we used to have.
These are deep problems, painful problems -- problems that quick fix approaches can't solve.
A few years ago, my wife Sandra and I were struggling with this kind of concern. One of our sons
was having a very difficult time in school. He was doing poorly academically; he didn't even know
how to follow the instructions on the tests, let alone do well in them. Socially he was immature, often
embarrassing those closest to him. Athletically, he was small, skinny, and uncoordinated -- swinging
his baseball bat, for example, almost before the ball was even pitched. Others would laugh at him.
Sandra and I were consumed with a desire to help him. We felt that if "success" were important in
any area of life, it was supremely important in our role as parents. So we worked on our attitudes and
behavior toward him and we tried to work on his. We attempted to psyche him up using positive
mental attitude techniques. "Come on, son! You can do it! We know you can. Put your hands a little
higher on the bat and keep your eye on the ball. Don't swing till it gets close to you." And if he did a
little better, we would go to great lengths to reinforce him. "That's good, son, keep it up."
When others laughed, we reprimanded them. "Leave him alone. Get off his back. He's just
learning." And our son would cry and insist that he'd never be any good and that he didn't like baseball
anyway.
Nothing we did seemed to help, and we were really worried. We could see the effect this was
having on his self-esteem. We tried to be encouraging and helpful and positive, but after repeated
failure, we finally drew back and tried to look at the situation on a different level.
At this time in my professional role I was involved in leadership development work with various
clients throughout the country. In that capacity I was preparing bimonthly programs on the subject of
communication and perception for IBM's Executive Development Program participants.
As I researched and prepared these presentations, I became particularly interested in how
perceptions are formed, how they behave. This led me to a study of expectancy theory and
self-fulfilling prophecies or the "Pygmalion effect," and to a realization of how deeply imbedded our
perceptions are. It taught me that we must look at the lens through which we see the world, as well as
at the world we see, and that the lens itself shapes how we interpret the world.
As Sandra and I talked about the concepts I was teaching at IBM and about our own situation, we
began to realize that what we were doing to help our son was not in harmony with the way we really
saw him. When we honestly examined our deepest feelings, we realized that our perception was that
he was basically inadequate, somehow "behind." No matter how much we worked on our attitude and
behavior, our efforts were ineffective because, despite our actions and our words, what we really
communicated to him was, "You aren't capable. You have to be protected."
We began to realize that if we wanted to change the situation, we first had to change ourselves.
And to change ourselves effectively, we first had to change our perceptions.
The Personality and Character Ethics
At the same time, in addition to my research on perception, I was also deeply immersed in an
in-depth study of the success literature published in the United States since 1776. I was reading or
scanning literally hundreds of books, articles, and essays in fields such as self-improvement, popular
psychology, and self-help. At my fingertips was the sum and substance of what a free and democratic
people considered to be the keys to successful living.
As my study took me back through 200 years of writing about success, I noticed a startling pattern
emerging in the content of the literature. Because of our own pain, and because of similar pain I had
seen in the lives and relationships of many people I had worked with through the years, I began to feel

=== Page 8 ===
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE Brought to you by FlyHeart
more and more that much of the success literature of the past 50 years was superficial. It was filled
with social image consciousness, techniques and quick fixes -- with social band-aids and aspirin that
addressed acute problems and sometimes even appeared to solve them temporarily -- but left the
underlying chronic problems untouched to fester and resurface time and again.
In stark contrast, almost all the literature in the first 150 years or so focused on what could be called
the character ethic as the foundation of success -- things like integrity, humility, fidelity, temperance,
courage, justice, patience, industry, simplicity, modesty, and the Golden Rule. Benjamin Franklin's
autobiography is representative of that literature. It is, basically, the story of one man's effort to
integrate certain principles and habits deep within his nature.
The character ethic taught that there are basic principles of effective living, and that people can only
experience true success and enduring happiness as they learn and integrate these principles into their
basic character.
But shortly after World War I the basic view of success shifted from the character ethic to what we
might call the personality ethic. Success became more a function of personality, of public image, of
attitudes and behaviors, skills and techniques, that lubricate the processes of human interaction. This
personality ethic essentially took two paths: one was human and public relations techniques, and the
other was positive mental attitude (PMA). Some of this philosophy was expressed in inspiring and
sometimes valid maxims such as "Your attitude determines your altitude," "Smiling wins more friends
than frowning," and "Whatever the mind of man can conceive and believe it can achieve.
Other parts of the personality approach were clearly manipulative, even deceptive, encouraging
people to use techniques to get other people to like them, or to fake interest in the hobbies of others to
get out of them what they wanted, or to use the "power look," or to intimidate their way through life.
Some of this literature acknowledged character as an ingredient of success, but tended to
compartmentalize it rather than recognize it as foundational and catalytic. Reference to the character
ethic became mostly lip service; the basic thrust was quick-fix influence techniques, power strategies,
communication skills, and positive attitudes.
This personality ethic, I began to realize, was the subconscious source of the solutions Sandra and I
were attempting to use with our son. As I thought more deeply about the difference between the
personality and character ethics, I realized that Sandra and I had been getting social mileage out of our
children's good behavior, and, in our eyes, this son simply didn't measure up. Our image of ourselves,
and our role as good, caring parents was even deeper than our image of our son and perhaps influenced
it. There was a lot more wrapped up in the way we were seeing and handling the problem than our
concern for our son's welfare.
As Sandra and I talked, we became painfully aware of the powerful influence of our character and
motives and of our perception of him. We knew that social comparison motives were out of harmony
with our deeper values and could lead to conditional love and eventually to our son's lessened sense of
self-worth. So we determined to focus our efforts on us -- not on our techniques, but on our deepest
motives and our perception of him. Instead of trying to change him, we tried to stand apart -- to
separate us from him -- and to sense his identity, individuality, separateness, and worth.
Through deep thought and the exercise of faith and prayer, we began to see our son in terms of his
own uniqueness. We saw within him layers and layers of potential that would be realized at his own
pace and speed. We decided to relax and get out of his way and let his own personality emerge. We
saw our natural role as being to affirm, enjoy, and value him. We also conscientiously worked on our
motives and cultivated internal sources of security so that our own feelings of worth were not
dependent on our children's "acceptable" behavior.
As we loosened up our old perception of our son and developed value-based motives, new feelings
began to emerge. We found ourselves enjoying him instead of comparing or judging him. We
stopped trying to clone him in our own image or measure him against social expectations. We

=== Page 9 ===
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE Brought to you by FlyHeart
stopped trying to kindly, positively manipulate him into an acceptable social mold. Because we saw
him as fundamentally adequate and able to cope with life, we stopped protecting him against the
ridicule of others.
He had been nurtured on this protection, so he went through some withdrawal pains, which he
expressed and which we accepted, but did not necessarily respond to. "We don't need to protect you,"
was the unspoken message. "You're fundamentally okay."
As the weeks and months passed, he began to feel a quiet confidence and affirmed himself. He
began to blossom, at his own pace and speed. He became outstanding as measured by standard social
criteria -- academically, socially and athletically -- at a rapid clip, far beyond the so-called natural
developmental process. As the years passed, he was elected to several student body leadership
positions, developed into an all-state athlete and started bringing home straight A report cards. He
developed an engaging and guileless personality that has enabled him to relate in nonthreatening ways
to all kinds of people.
Sandra and I believe that our son's "socially impressive" accomplishments were more a
serendipitous expression of the feelings he had about himself than merely a response to social reward.
This was an amazing experience for Sandra and me, and a very instructional one in dealing with our
other children and in other roles as well. It brought to our awareness on a very personal level the vital
difference between the personality ethic and the character ethic of success. The Psalmist expressed our
conviction well: "Search your own heart with all diligence for out of it flow the issues of life."
Primary and Secondary Greatness
My experience with my son, my study of perception and my reading of the success literature
coalesced to create one of those "Aha!" experiences in life when suddenly things click into place. I was
suddenly able to see the powerful impact of the personality ethic and to clearly understand those subtle,
often consciously unidentified discrepancies between what I knew to be true -- some things I had been
taught many years ago as a child and things that were deep in my own inner sense of value -- and the
quick fix philosophies that surrounded me every day. I understood at a deeper level why, as I had
worked through the years with people from all walks of life, I had found that the things I was teaching
and knew to be effective were often at variance with these popular voices.
I am not suggesting that elements of the personality ethic -- personality growth, communication skill
training, and education in the field of influence strategies and positive thinking -- are not beneficial, in
fact sometimes essential for success. I believe they are. But these are secondary, not primary traits.
Perhaps, in utilizing our human capacity to build on the foundation of generations before us, we have
inadvertently become so focused on our own building that we have forgotten the foundation that holds
it up; or in reaping for so long where we have not sown, perhaps we have forgotten the need to sow.
If I try to use human influence strategies and tactics of how to get other people to do what I want, to
work better, to be more motivated, to like me and each other -- while my character is fundamentally
flawed, marked by duplicity and insincerity -- then, in the long run, I cannot be successful. My
duplicity will breed distrust, and everything I do -- even using so-called good human relations
techniques -- will be perceived as manipulative. It simply makes no difference how good the rhetoric
is or even how good the intentions are; if there is little or no trust, there is no foundation for permanent
success. Only basic goodness gives life to technique.
To focus on technique is like cramming your way through school. You sometimes get by, perhaps
even get good grades, but if you don't pay the price day in and day out, you never achieve true mastery
of the subjects you study or develop an educated mind.
Did you ever consider how ridiculous it would be to try to cram on a farm -- to forget to plant in the
spring, play all summer and then cram in the fall to bring in the harvest? The farm is a natural system.

=== Page 10 ===
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE Brought to you by FlyHeart
The price must be paid and the process followed. You always reap what you sow; there is no shortcut.
This principle is also true, ultimately, in human behavior, in human relationships. They, too, are
natural systems based on the The Law of the Harvest. In the short run, in an artificial social system such
as school, you may be able to get by if you learn how to manipulate the man-made rules, to "play the
game." In most one-shot or short-lived human interactions, you can use the personality ethic to get by
and to make favorable impressions through charm and skill and pretending to be interested in other
people's hobbies. You can pick up quick, easy techniques that may work in short-term situations.
But secondary traits alone have no permanent worth in long-term relationships. Eventually, if there
isn't deep integrity and fundamental character strength, the challenges of life will cause true motives to
surface and human relationship failure will replace short-term success.
Many people with secondary greatness -- that is, social recognition for their talents -- lack primary
greatness or goodness in their character. Sooner or later, you'll see this in every long-term relationship
they have, whether it is with a business associate, a spouse, a friend, or a teenage child going through
an identity crisis. It is character that communicates most eloquently. As Emerson once put it, "What
you are shouts so loudly in my ears that I cannot hear what you say."
There are, of course, situations where people have character strength but they lack communication
skills, and that undoubtedly affects the quality of relationships as well. But the effects are still
secondary.
In the last analysis, what we are communicates far more eloquently than anything we say or do.
We all know it. There are people we trust absolutely because we know their character. Whether
they're eloquent or not, whether they have the human relations techniques or not, we trust them, and
we work successfully with them.
In the words of William George Jordan, "Into the hands of every individual is given a marvelous
power for good or evil -- the silent unconscious, unseen influence of his life. This is simply the
constant radiation of what man really is, not what he pretends to be."
The Power of a Paradigm
The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People embody many of the fundamental principles of human
effectiveness. These habits are basic; they are primary. They represent the internalization of correct
principles upon which enduring happiness and success are based.
But before we can really understand these Seven Habits TM, we need to understand our own
"paradigms" and how to make a "A Paradigm Shift TM."
Both the The Character Ethic The Personality Ethic are examples of social paradigms. The word
paradigm comes from the Greek. It was originally a scientific term, and is more commonly used today
to mean a model, theory, perception, assumption, or frame of reference. In the more general sense, it's
the way we "see" the world -- not in terms of our visual sense of sight, but in terms of perceiving,
understanding, and interpreting.
For our purposes, a simple way to understand paradigms is to see them as maps. We all know that
"the map is not the territory." A map is simply an explanation of certain aspects of the territory. That's
exactly what a paradigm is. It is a theory, an explanation, or model of something else.
Suppose you wanted to arrive at a specific location in central Chicago. A street map of the city
would be a great help to you in reaching your destination. But suppose you were given the wrong
map. Through a printing error, the map labeled "Chicago" was actually a map of Detroit. Can you
imagine the frustration, the ineffectiveness of trying to reach your destination?
You might work on your behavior -- you could try harder, be more diligent, double your speed.
But your efforts would only succeed in getting you to the wrong place faster.
