=== Page 2 ===
MEDICAL LEADERSHIP
Today’s healthcare systems need doctors and consultants to act as leaders, within the
multi-disciplinary team, in addition to carrying out their clinical role. This book identifies
the key elements of successful leadership through ‘medically led’ service development and
system transformation and shows how this can benefit patient care, particularly when patients
become partners in the process.
The authors provide a conceptual framework of medical leadership and a set of scientific
methods and tools that make a significant contribution to advancing quality and transforming
services in healthcare. On top of this, they present analytical tools which medical professionals
can use to support their own improvement or system transformation strategy, including ways
of measuring improvement and the returns on investment of medical leadership.
Weaved throughout the book are real-life case studies from medical leaders across the
world, providing students with valuable practical insights. Chapter summaries and reflections
are provided to support learning.
Medical Leadership will be essential reading for students on medical and clinical leadership
courses internationally as well as for all practising doctors, consultants and General Practitioners.
Jill Aylott is Consultant in Autism and CEO at the International Academy of Medical
Leadership (IAML) and Head of Programmes for Medical Leadership, Social Care and
Quality Improvement.
Jeff Perring is Consultant Intensivist and Medical Director, Sheffield Children’s NHS
Foundation Trust.
Ann LN Chapman is Consultant in Infectious Diseases and General Medicine, and Clinical
Director for Medicine, NHS Lanarkshire; Honorary Clinical Associate Professor, University
of Glasgow.
Ahmed Nassef is Consultant Vascular Surgeon at Sheffield Teaching Hospitals Foundation
NHS Trust, Council member & Deputy Convener of Exams for the Royal College of
Surgeons Edinburgh, Lead of Communication Skills for the Intercollegiate Board of Surgical
Exams, UK, and Medical Director, International Academy of Medical Leadership.

=== Page 4 ===
MEDICAL LEADERSHIP
A Toolkit for Service Development
and System Transformation
Edited by Jill Aylott, Jeff Perring,
Ann LN Chapman and Ahmed Nassef

=== Page 5 ===
First published 2019
by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
and by Routledge
711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2019 selection and editorial matter, Jill Aylott, Jeff Perring, Ann LN Chapman
and Ahmed Nassef; individual chapters, the contributors
The right of Jill Aylott, Jeff Perring, Ann LN Chapman and Ahmed Nassef
to be identified as the authors of the editorial material, and of the authors
for their individual chapters, has been asserted in accordance with
sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or
utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now
known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in
any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing
from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or
registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation
without intent to infringe.
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Aylott, Jill, editor. | Perring, Jeff, editor. | Chapman, Ann, Dr.,
editor. | Nassef, Ahmed, editor.
Title: Medical leadership : a toolkit for service development and system
transformation / edited by Jill Aylott, Jeff Perring, Ann Chapman and
Ahmed Nassef.
Description: Abingdon, Oxon ; New York, NY : Routledge, 2019. |
Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2018020299 | ISBN 9781138217348 (hbk.) |
ISBN 9781138217355 (pbk.) | ISBN 9781315440880 (ebk.)
Subjects: MESH: Leadership | Health Services Administration |
Delivery of Health Care | Physician’s Role | Organizational
Case Studies
Classification: LCC RA971 | NLM W 84.1 | DDC 362.1068—dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2018020299
ISBN: 978-1-138-21734-8 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-138-21735-5 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-315-44088-0 (ebk)
Typeset in Bembo
by Apex CoVantage, LLC

=== Page 6 ===
CONTENTS
Foreword ix
Contributor bios xi
PART 1
A global emergent context for medical leadership 1
1 An introduction 3
Ahmed Nassef, Mathew Fortnam and Jill Aylott
2 ‘Leadership’ and ‘medical leadership’ 8
Bolarinde Ola and Aishin Lok
3 Quality improvement as the goal of medical leadership 16
Rachael Baines
4 Understanding patient experience as a clinical leader 22
Suvira Madan
5 Primary care and general practice: medical leadership for all 33
Mathew Fortnam
6 A theoretical model to engage doctors in medical leadership 38
Ahmed Nassef

=== Page 7 ===
vi Contents
PART 2
Medical leadership 57
7 An introduction 59
Ann LN Chapman
8 Medical leadership and reducing health inequalities 61
Gilly Ennals
9 Medical leadership and reducing variation in healthcare 65
Ravishanka Sargur
10 Developing and analysing effective teams 79
Walaa Al-Safi
11 A strategy for engaging primary and secondary care
doctors in medical leadership 86
Simon Boyes
12 Medical engagement – strategies for engagement from the
‘grass roots’ 95
Paddy Dobbs and Alix Fonfe
13 Leadership diagnostics and reflections on personal
leadership development 106
Michael Robinson and Eleni Lekoudis
PART 3
Improvement science, medical leadership and
measurement for improvement 127
14 An introduction 129
Jill Aylott
15 Data analysts building capability in partnership with
medical leaders 132
Lisa Fox
16 Root cause analysis and simulation to improve quality 137
Adam Burns

=== Page 8 ===
Contents vii
17 Leadership diagnostics for self-awareness and bespoke
course design 141
Prosenjit Giri
18 Medical leadership and the use of data for a continuous
quality improvement collaborative (CQIC) in an accident
and emergency department 153
Prakash Subedi, Jill Aylott, Prosenjit Giri,
Martha Zaluaga Quintero, Sanjay Sinha, Sanjai Subramanian
and Sathi Permaul
19 Developing a human transplantation health service in
Nepal with ethical and moral medical leadership 163
Pukar C. Shrestha
PART 4
Service development 173
20 An introduction 175
Jeff Perring
21 ‘Patient reported outcome measures’: we have barely
started to walk let alone run 176
Fiona Kew
22 Service improvement to reduce early deaths of children in
hospital: the design of an electronic observation system 189
Victoria Hemming
23 Innovations in person-centred service redesign for
young carers 197
Samantha Wong
24 Service improvement in paediatric dentistry 203
Halla Zaitoun
25 Reflections on service improvement by medical leaders 210
Jeff Perring, Fiona Kew, Victoria Hemming, Samantha Wong and
Halla Zaitoun

=== Page 9 ===
viii Contents
PART 5
System transformation 223
26 Introduction to critical issues in health system transformation 225
Jill Aylott and Ahmed Nassef
27 System transformation for health and social care 229
Branko Perunovic
28 A strategy for engaging teams and motivating staff through
system transformation 232
Rachael Baines and Prasad Godbole
29 Transforming operating theatre services with medical leadership 238
Ahmed Othman, Jayarama Mohan, Prabhakar Motkur, Salma
Noor, Milind Rao, Adam Wolverson, Amit Shukla, Gurdip Singh
Samra, Mohit Gupta, Chloe Scruton, Jill Aylott, Karen Kilner
and Prasad Godbole
30 Transforming the emergency medicine medical workforce:
a new ‘hybrid’ doctor with integrated speciality
training and a competency-based Fellowship in Quality
Improvement (FQim) 244
Prakash Subedi, Jill Aylott, Naushad Khan, Prosenjit Giri
and Lesley Hammond
31 Quality improvement and system transformation in
emergency medicine 251
Elizabeth Hutchinson
32 Transforming the quality of hospital care through advocacy
for people with a learning disability and/or autism 257
Jonathan Sahu
33 Transforming services for patients with spinal cord injury –
a national review of standards and practice 263
Pradeep Thumbikat
Index 279

=== Page 10 ===
FOREWORD
Medical leadership: a toolkit for service development and
system transformation
In 2008, during my time as health minister, I produced the report High Quality
Care for All, in which I addressed leadership as a fundamental component of the
NHS. The report focused on the importance of encouraging clinicians to not only
be practitioners but also to be partners and leaders with patients within the NHS.
With empowered leaders comes a motivated workforce who will drive forward
the quality and safety agenda. I previously highlighted the need for a stronger role
for clinical leadership and management throughout the healthcare system. Since
2008, we have seen some drive towards this with national leadership schemes,
courses and frameworks. However, leadership is not just about individuals, but also
about teams, and there is still a long way to go to empowering staff to fully take
on these roles. We need to encourage staff to step up and make a case for change.
As I once said – “It is relatively easy to set out a vision, much harder to make it a
reality”.
This insightful book offers a toolkit that can be applied for those wanting to
develop their medical leadership skills in order to see service development and
system transformation.
The book covers the key principles of leadership, developing a strong foundation
of the role of medical leadership in various settings, and the fundamental principle
of ensuring that care remains patient-centric. The second part of the book builds on
the foundations laid out by the first part, discussing more specific aspects of leader-
ship such as how it can reduce variation in quality of healthcare and help to reduce
health inequalities. The latter parts of the book delve deeper into how we measure
improvement to ensure we see service transformation and system development.
