=== Page 3 ===
PRAISE FOR CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
"Relationships are the priority of life, and conversations are the
crucial element in profound caring of relationships. This book
helps us to think about what we really want to say. If you want
to succeed in both talking and listening, read this book."
-Dr. Lloyd J. Ogilvie, chaplain, United States Senate
"Important, lucid, and practical, Crucial Conversations is a
book that will make a difference in your life. Learn how to flour­
ish in every difficult situation."
-Robert E. Quinn, ME Tracy Collegiate Professor of
OBHRM, University of Michigan Business School
"I was personally and professionally inspired by this book-and
I'm not easily impressed. In the fast-paced world of IT, the success
of our systems, and our business, depends on crucial conversations
we have every day. Unfortunately, because our environment is so
technical, far too often we forget about the 'human systems' that
make or break us. These skills are the missing foundation piece."
-Maureen Burke, manager of training,
Coca-Cola Enterprises, Inc.
"The book is compelling. Yes, I found myself in too many of their
examples of what not to do when caught in these worst-of-all­
worlds situations! GET THIS BOOK, WHIP OUT A PEN AND
GET READY TO SCRIBBLE MARGIN NOTES FURIOUSLY,
AND PRACTICE, PRACTICE, PRACTICE THE INVALUABLE
TOOLS THESE AUTHORS PRESENT. I know I did-and it
helped me salvage several difficult situations and repair my
damaged self-esteem in others. I will need another copy pretty
soon. as I'm wearing out the pages in this one!"
-James Belasco. best selling author of Flight of the Buffalo,
-
l!l1trl!prl!l1eur. professor. und l!xl!cutive director of the Financial
Tilllrs Knowkdgc Diuloguc

=== Page 4 ===
"Crucial Conversations is the most useful self-help book I have
ever read.I 'm awed by how insightful, readable, well organized,
and focused it is. I keep thinking: 'If only I had been exposed to
these dialogue skills 30 years ago ... '
"
-John Hatch, founder, FINCA International
"One of the greatest tragedies is seeing someone with incredible
talent get derailed because he or she lacks some basic skills.
Crucial Conversations addresses the number one reason execu­
tives derail, and it provides extremely helpful tools to operate in
a fast-paced, results-oriented environment."
-Karie A. Willyerd, chief talent officer, Solectron
"The book prescribes, with structure and wit, a way to improve on
the most fundamental element of organizational learning and
growth-honest, unencumbered dialogue between individuals.
There are one or two of the many leadership/management
'thought' books on my shelf that are frayed and dog-eared from
use.C rucial Conversations will no doubt end up in the same con­
dition."
-John Gill, VP of Human Resources, Rolls Royce USA

=== Page 5 ===
Crucial
Conversations

=== Page 7 ===
Crucial
Conversations
Tools for Talking
When Stakes Are High
by
Kerry Patterson, Joseph Grenny,
Ron McMillan, and AI Switzler
MCGRAW-HILL
New York ChIcago San FrancIsco LIsbon
London Madrzd MexIco CIty MIlan New DelhI
San Juan Seoul Singapore Sydney Toronto

=== Page 8 ===
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Crucial Conversations : tools for talking when stakes are high / Kerry
Patterson ... [et al.].
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-07-140194-6
1. International communication. 2. Interpersonal relations. I.
Patterson, Kerry, 1946-
BF637.C45.C78 2002
153.6-dc21 2002001129
McGraw-Hill
�
A Division of The McGraw·Hill Companies
Copyright © 2002 by Kerry Patterson, Joseph Grenny, Ron McMillan, and Al Switzler.
All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. Except as permitted
under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be
reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a data base or
retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the publisher.
29 30 31 32 33 34 35 DOC/DOC 0 9 8 7
ISBN 0-07-140194-6
This book was set in R Life Roman by Patricia Caruso of McGraw-Hill Professional's
DTP composition unit in Hightstown, N.J.
Printed and bound by R.R. Donnelly & Sons Company.
McGraw-Hill books are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and
sales promotions, or for use in corporate training programs. For more information,
please write to the Director of Special Sales, Professional Publishing, McGraw-Hill,
Two Penn Plaza, New York, NY 10121-2298. Or contact your local bookstore.

=== Page 9 ===
We dedicate this book to
Louise, Celia, Bonnie, and Linda-
whose support is abundant,
whose love is nourishin�
and whose patience is just shy of infinite.
And to our children
Christine, Rebecca, Taylofi Scott,
Aislinn, Carat Seth, Samue� Hyrum,
Ambefi Megan, Chase, Hayley, Bryn,
Ambefi Laura, Becca, Rachael, Benjamin,
Meridith, Lindsey, Kelley, Todd
who have been a wonderful source of learning.

=== Page 11 ===
Contents
FOREWORD XI
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS XV
CH. 1: What's a Crucial Conversation?
And Who Cares? 1
CH. 2: Mastering Crucial Conversations
The Power of Dialogue 17
CH. 3: Start with Heart
How to Stay Focused on What You Really Want 27
CH. 4: Learn to Look
How to Notice When Safety Is at Risk 45
CH. 5: Make It Safe
How to Make It Safe to Talk about Almost Anything 65
CH. 6: Master My Stories
How to Stay in Dialogue When You're Angry,
Scared, or Hurt 93

=== Page 12 ===
X CONTENTS
CH. 7: STATE My Path
How to Speak Persuasively, Not Abrasively 119
CH. 8: Explore Others' Paths
How to Listen When Others Blow Up or Clam Up 141
CH. 9: Move to Action
How to Turn Crucial Conversations
into Action and Results 161
CH. 10: Putting It All Together
Tools for Preparing and Learning 179
CH. 11: Yeah, But
Advice for Tough Cases 193
CH. 12: Change Your Life
How to Turn Ideas into Habits 215
ENDNOTES 229
INDEX 231

=== Page 13 ===
Foreword
This is a breakthrough book. That is exactly how I saw it when
I first read the manuscript. I so resonated with the importance,
power, and timeliness of its message that I even suggested to the
authors that they title it "Breakthrough Conversations." But as I
read deeper, listened to the tapes, and experienced the insight
borne of years of experience with this material, I came to under­
stand why it is titled Crucial Conversations.
From my own work with organizations, including families,
and from my own experience, I have come to see that there are
a few defining moments in our lives and careers that make all
the difference. Many of these defining moments come from
"crucial" or "breakthrough" conversations with important peo­
ple in emotionally charged situations where the decisions made
take us down one of several roads, each of which leads to an
entirely different destination.
I can see the wisdom in the assertion of the great historian
Arnold Toynbee, who said that you can pretty well summarize all
of history-not only of society, but of institutions and of people­
in four words: Nothing fails like success. In other words, when
a challenge in life is met by a response that is equal to it, you
have success. But when the challenge moves to a higher level,
the old, once successful response no longer works-it fails;
thus, nothing fails like success.

=== Page 14 ===
XII FOREWORD
The challenge has noticeably changed for our lives, our fami­
lies, and our organizations. Just as the world is changing at
frightening speed and has become increasingly and profoundly
interdependent with marvelous and dangerous technologies, so,
too, have the stresses and pressures we all experience exponen­
tially increased. This charged atmosphere makes it all the more
imperative that we nourish our relationships and develop tools,
skills, and enhanced capacity to find new and better solutions to
our problems.
These newer, better solutions will not represent "my way" or
"your way"-they will represent "our way." In short, the solu­
tions must be synergistic, meaning that the whole is greater than
the sum of the parts. Such synergy may manifest itself in a bet­
ter decision, a better relationship, a better decision-making
process, increased commitment to implement decisions made,
or a combination of two or more of these.
What you learn is that "crucial conversations" transform peo­
ple and relationships. They are anything but transacted; they
create an entirely new level of bonding. They produce what
Buddhism calls "the middle way" -not a compromise between
two opposites on a straight-line continuum, but a higher middle
way, like the apex of a triangle. Because two or more people
have created something new from genuine dialogue, bonding
takes place-just like the bonding that takes place in family or
marriage when a new child is created. When you produce some­
thing with another person that is truly creative, it's one of the
most powerful forms of bonding there is. In fact the bonding is
so strong that you simply would not be disloyal in his or her
absence, even if there were social pressure to join others in bad­
mouthing.
The sequential development of the subject matter in this book
is brilliant. It moves you from understanding the supernal power

=== Page 15 ===
FOREWORD XIII
of dialogue, to clarifying what you really want to have happen and
focusing on what actually is happening, to creating conditions of
safety, to using self-awareness and self-knowledge. And finally, it
moves you to learning how to achieve such a level of mutual
understanding and creative synergy that people are emotionally
connected to the conclusions reached and are emotionally willing
and committed to effectively implementing them. In short, you
move from creating the right mind- and heart-set to developing
and utilizing the right skill-set.
In spite of the fact that I have spent many years writing and
teaching similar ideas, I found myself being deeply influenced,
motivated, and even inspired by this material-learning new ideas,
going deeper into old ideas, seeing new applications, and broaden­
ing my understanding. I've also learned how these new techniques,
skills, and tools work together in enabling crucial conversations
that truly create a break with the mediocrity or mistakes of the
past. Most breakthroughs in life truly are "break-withs."
When I first put my hands on this book, I was delighted to see
that dear friends and colleagues had drawn on their entire lives
and professional experiences to not only address a tremendously
important topic, but also to do it in a way that is so accessible, so
fun, so full of humor and illustration, so full of common sense
and practicality. They show how to effectively blend and use both
intellectual (1.0.) and emotional intelligence (E.O.) to enable
crucial conversations.
I remember one of the authors having a crucial conversation
with his professor in college. The professor felt that this student
was neither paying the price in class nor living up to his potential.
This student, my friend, listened carefully, restated the professor's
concern, expressed appreciation for the professor's affirmation of
his potential
,
and then smilingly and calmly said, "My focus is on

=== Page 16 ===
XIV FOREWORD
other priorities, and the class is just not that important to me at
this time. I hope you can understand." The teacher was taken
aback, but then started to listen. A dialogue took place, new
understanding was achieved, and the bonding was deepened.
I know these authors to be outstanding individuals and
remarkable teachers and consultants, and have even seen them
work their magic in training seminars-but I didn't know if they
could take this complex topic and fit it into a book. They did. I
encourage you to really dig into this material, to pause and think
deeply about each part and how the parts are sequenced. Then
apply what you've learned, go back to the book again, learn
some more, and apply your new learnings. Remember, to know
and not to do is really not to know.
I think you'll discover, as have I, that crucial conversations, as
powerfully described in this book, reflect the insight of this
excerpt of Robert Frost's beautiful and memorable poem, "The
Road Not Taken":
Two roads diverged in a yellow wood,
And sorry I could not travel both
And be one traveler, long I stood
And looked down one as far as I could
To where it bent in the undergrowth; . . .
I shall be telling this with a sigh
Somewhere ages and ages hence:
Two roads diverged in a wood, and I­
I took the one less traveled by,
And that has made all the difference.
- Stephen R. Covey

=== Page 17 ===
Acknowledgments
We are deeply grateful to many.
First, to our colleagues at VitalSmarts, we express apprecia­
tion for creativity, discipline, competence, and friendship.
Thanks to Charla Allen, James Allred, Mike Carter, Benson
Dastrup, Kevin Koger, Kevin Sheehan, Jed Thompson, Mindy
Waite, and Yan Wang.
Also we appreciate our colleagues for their indispensable help
in teaching and testing these ideas: Bemell Christensen, Larry
Myler, Bev Roesch, and Steve Willis.
And to our associate friends who have worked hard to change
lives and organizations with these concepts-and provided
invaluable feedback for refining them: Mike Allen, Karol Bailey,
Pat Banks, Mike Cook, Brint Driggs, Simon Lia, Mike Miller, Jim
Munoa, Stacy Nelson, Larry Peters, Betsy Pickren, Mike
Quinlan, Ron Ragain, James Sanwick, Kurt Southam, Neil
Staker, Joe Thigpen, and Michael Thompson.
Thanks to our agent, Michael Broussard, for getting us the
opportunity to share our message. And thanks to our editor,
Nancy Hancock, a world-class partner in producing this book
and a master of crucial conversations.
And one final, sweeping, large thanks. So many have helped
us over the years, that we add this admittedly blanket thanks to
the clients, colleagues, friends, teachers, and associates on
whose shoulders we stand.

=== Page 19 ===
1
The void created by the failure to communicate
is soon filled with poison, drive� and
mlstepre$entation.
-c. NORTHCOTE PARKINSON
What's a Crucial
Conversation?
And Who Cares?
When people first hear the term "crucial conversation," many
conjure up images of presidents, emperors, and prime ministers
seated around a massive table while they debate the future of the
world. Although it's true that such discussions have a wide­
sweeping and lasting impact, they're not the kind we have in
mind. The crucial conversations we're referring to in the title of
this book are interactions that happen to everyone. They're the
day-to-day conversations that affect your life.
Now, what makes one of your conversations crucial as opposed
to plain vanilla? First, opinions vary. For example, you're talking
with your boss about a possible promotion. She thinks you're
not ready; you think you are. Second, stakes are high. You're in

=== Page 20 ===
a meeting with four coworkers and you're trying to pick a new
marketing strategy. You've got to do something different or your
company isn't going to hit its annual goals. Third, emotions run
strong. You're in the middle of a casual discussion with your
spouse and he or she brings up an "ugly incident" that took place
at yesterday's neighborhood block party. Apparently not only did
you flirt with someone at the party, but according to your spouse,
"You were practically making out." You don't remember flirting.
You simply remember being polite and friendly. Your spouse
walks off in a huff.
And speaking of the block party, at one point you're making
small talk with your somewhat crotchety and always colorful
neighbor about his shrinking kidneys when he says, "Speaking of
the new fence you're building . . ." From that moment on you
end up in a heated debate over placing the new fence-three
inches one way or the other. Three inches! He finishes by threat­
ening you with a lawsuit, and you punctuate your points by men­
tioning that he's not completely aware of the difference between
his hind part and his elbow. Emotions run really strong.
What makes each of these conversations crucial-and not sim­
ply challenging, frustrating, frightening, or annoying-is that the
results could have a huge impact on the quality of your life. In each
case, some element of your daily routine could be forever altered
for better or worse. Clearly a promotion could make a big differ­
ence. Your company's success affects you and everyone you work
with. Your relationship with your spouse influences every aspect of
your life. Even something as trivial as a debate over a property line
affects how you get along with your neighbor. If you handle even a
seemingly insignificant conversation poorly, you establish a pattern
of behavior that shows up in all of your crucial conversations.
By definition, crucial conversations are about tough issues.
Unfortunately, it's human nature to back away from discussions
we fear will hurt us or make things worse. We're masters at avoid­
ing these tough conversations. Coworkers send email to caI.:h

=== Page 21 ===
other when they should walk down the hall and talk turkey. Bosses
leave voice mail in lieu of meeting with their direct reports. Family
members change the subject when an issue gets too risky. We (the
authors) have a friend who learned through a voice-mail message
that his wife was divorcing him. We use all kinds of tactics to
dodge touchy issues.
But it doesn't have to be this way. If you know how to handle
(even master) crucial conversations, you can step up to and effec­
tively hold tough conversations about virtually any topic.
Crucial Conversation (kroo shel kan'viir sa'shen) n
A discussion between two or more people where (1) stakes are
high, (2) opinions vary, and (3) emotions run strong.
HOW DO WE TYPICALLY HANDLE CRUCIAL
CONVERSATIONS?
Just because we're in the middle of a crucial conversation (or
maybe thinking about stepping up to one) doesn't mean that
we're in trouble or that we won't fare well. In truth, when we
face crucial conversations, we can do one of three things:
• We can avoid them.
• We can face them and handle them poorly.
• We can face them and handle them well.
That seems simple enough. Walk away from crucial conversa­
tions and suffer the consequences. Handle them poorly and suf­
fer the consequences. Or handle them well.
"I don't know," you think to yourself. "Given the three choic­
es, I'll go with handling them well."
We're on Our Worst Behavior
But do we handle them well? When talking turns tough, do we
pause, takc a deep brcuth, unnl.>uncc to our innerselves, "Uh-oh,

=== Page 22 ===
4 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
this discussion is crucial. I'd better pay close attention" and then
trot out our best behavior? Or when we're anticipating a poten­
tially dangerous discussion, do we step up to it rather than scam­
per away? Sometimes. Sometimes we boldly step up to hot topics,
monitor our behavior, and offer up our best work. We mind our
Ps and Os. Sometimes we're just flat-out good.
And then we have the rest of our lives. These are the moments
when, for whatever reason, we either anticipate a crucial conver­
sation or are in the middle of one and we're at our absolute
worst-we yell; we withdraw; we say things we later regret. When
conversations matter the most-that is, when conversations move
from casual to crucial-we're generally on our worst behavior.
Why is that?
We're designed wrong. When conversations tum from routine
to crucial, we're often in trouble. That's because emotions don't
exactly prepare us to converse effectively. Countless generations
of genetic shaping drive humans to handle crucial conversations
with flying fists and fleet feet, not intelligent persuasion and gen­
tle attentiveness.
For instance, consider a typical crucial conversation. Someone
says something you disagree with about a topic that matters a
great deal to you and the hairs on the back of your neck stand up.
The hairs you can handle. Unfortunately, your body does more.
Two tiny organs seated neatly atop your kidneys pump adrenaline
into your bloodstream. You don't choose to do this. Your adrenal
glands do it, and then you have to live with it.
And that's not all. Your brain then diverts blood from activi­
ties it deems nonessential to high-priority tasks such as hitting
and running. Unfortunately, as the large muscles of the arms
and legs get more blood, the higher-level reasoning sections of
your brain get less. As a result, you end up facing challenging
conversations with the same equipment available to a rhesus
monkey.

=== Page 23 ===
WHAT'S A CRUCIAL CONVERSATION? 5
We're under pressure. Let's add another factor. Crucial con­
versations are frequently spontaneous. More often than not, they
come out of nowhere. And since you're caught by surprise,
you're forced to conduct an extraordinarily complex human
interaction in real time-no books, no coaches, and certainly no
short breaks while a team of therapists runs to your aid and
pumps you full of nifty ideas.
What do you have to work with? The issue at hand, the other
person, and a brain that's preparing to fight or take flight. It's lit­
tle wonder that we often say and do things that make perfect sense
in the moment, but later on seem, well, stupid.
"What was I thinking?" you wonder.
The truth is, you were real-time multitasking with a brain that
was working another job. You're lucky you didn't suffer a stroke.
We're stumped. Now let's throw in one more complication.
You don't know where to start. You're making this up as you go
along because you haven't often seen real-life models of effec­
tive communication skills. Let's say that you actually planned
for a tough conversation-maybe you've even mentally
rehearsed. You feel prepared, and you're as cool as a cucumber.
Will you succeed? Not necessarily. You can still screw up,
because practice doesn't make perfect; perfect practice makes
perfect.
This means that first you have to know what to practice.
Sometimes you don't. After all, you may have never actually seen
how a certain problem is best handled. You may have seen what
not to do-as modeled by a host of friends, colleagues, and, yes,
even your parents. In fact, you may have sworn time and again
not to act the same way.
Left with no healthy models, you're now more or less
stumped. So what do you do? You do what most people do. You
wing it. You piece together the words, create a certain mood, and
otherwise make up what you think will work-all the while

=== Page 24 ===
6 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
multiprocessing with a half-starved brain. It's little wonder that
when it matters the most, we're often at our worst behavior.
We act in self-defeating ways. In our doped-up, dumbed-down
state, the strategies we choose for dealing with our crucial con­
versations are perfectly designed to keep us from what we actu­
ally want. We're our own worst enemies-and we don't even
realize it. Here's how this works.
Let's say that your significant other has been paying less and
less attention to you. You realize he or she has a busy job, but
you still would like more time together. You drop a few hints
about the issue, but your loved one doesn't handle it well. You
decide not to put on added pressure, so you clam up. Of course,
since you're not all that happy with the arrangement, your dis­
pleasure now comes out through an occasional sarcastic remark.
"Another late night, huh? Do you really need all of the
money in the world?"
Unfortunately (and here's where the problem becomes self­
defeating), the more you snip and snap, the less your loved one
wants to be around you. So your significant other spends even
less time with you, you become even more upset, and the spi­
ral continues. Your behavior is now actually creating the very
thing you didn't want in the first place. You're caught in an
unhealthy, self-defeating loop.
Or consider what's happening with your roommate Terry­
who wears your and your other two roommates' clothes (without
asking)-and he's proud of it. In fact, one day while walking out
the door, he glibly announced that he was wearing something
from each of your closets. You could see Taylor's pants, Scott's
shirt, and, yes, even Chris's new matching shoes-and-socks
ensemble. What of yours could he possibly be wearing? Eww!
Your response, quite naturally, has been to bad-mouth Terry
behind his back. That is until one day when he overheard you

=== Page 25 ===
WHATS A CRUCIAL CONVERSATION? 7
belittling him to a friend, and you're now so embarrassed that you
avoid being around him. Now when you're out of the apartment,
he wears your clothes, eats your food, and uses your computer
out of spite.
Let's try another example. You share a cubicle with a four-star
slob and you're a bit of a neat freak. In Odd Couple parlance,
you're Felix and he's Oscar. Your coworker has left you notes
written in grease pencil on your file cabinet, in catsup on the back
of a french-fry bag, and in permanent marker on your desk blot­
ter. You, in contrast, leave him typed Post-it notes. Typed.
At first you sort of tolerated each other. Then you began to get
on each other's nerves. You started nagging him about cleaning
up. He started nagging you about your nagging. Now you're
beginning to react to each other. Every time you nag, he becomes
upset, and, well, let's say that he doesn't exactly clean up. Every
time he calls you an "anal-retentive nanny," you vow not to give
in to his vile and filthy ways.
What has come from all this bickering? Now you're neater
than ever, and your cubicle partner's half of the work area is
about to be condemned by the health department. You're caught
in a self-defeating loop. The more the two of you push each
other, the more you create the very behaviors you both despise.
Some Common Crucial Conversations
In each of these examples of unhealthy self-perpetuation, the
stakes were moderate to high, opinions varied, and emotions ran
strong. Actually, to be honest, in a couple of the examples the
stakes were fairly low at first, but with time and growing emo­
tions, the relationship eventually turned sour and quality of life
suffered-making the risks high.
These examples, of course, are merely the tip of an enormous
and ugly iceberg of problems stemming from crucial conversations

=== Page 26 ===
8 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
that either have been avoided or have gone wrong. Other topics
that could easily lead to disaster include
• Ending a relationship
• Talking to a coworker who behaves offensively or makes sugges­
tive comments
• Asking a friend to repay a loan
• Giving the boss feedback about her behavior
• Approaching a boss who is breaking his own safety or quality
policies
• Critiquing a colleague's work
• Asking a roommate to move out
• Resolving custody or visitation issues with an ex-spouse
• Dealing with a rebellious teen
• Talking to a team member who isn't keeping commitments
• Discussing problems with sexual intimacy
• Confronting a loved one about a substance abuse problem
• Talking to a colleague who is hoarding infonnation or resources
• Giving an unfavorable performance review
• Asking in-laws to quit interfering
• Talking to a coworker about a personal hygiene problem
OUR AUDACIOUS CLAIM
Let's say that either you avoid tough issues or when you do bring
them up, you're on your worst behavior. What's the big deal?
How high are the stakes anyway? Do the consequences of a
fouled-up conversation extend beyond the conversation itself?
Should you worry?

=== Page 27 ===
WHAT'S A CRUCIAL CONVERSATION? 9
Actually, the effects of conversations gone bad can be both
devastating and far reaching. Our research has shown that strong
relationships, careers, organizations, and communities all draw
from the same source of power-the ability to talk openly about
high-stakes, emotional, controversial topics.
So here's the audacious claim. Master your crucial conversa­
tions and you'llk ick-start your career, strengthen your relation­
ships, and improve your health. As you and others master high­
stakes discussions, you'll also vitalize your organization and your
community.
Kick-Start Your Career
Could the ability to master crucial conversations help your career?
Absolutely. Twenty-five years of research with twenty thousand
people and hundreds of organizations has taught us that individu­
als who are the most influential-who can get things done, and at
the same time build on relationships-are those who master their
crucial conversations.
For instance, high performers know how to stand up to the
boss without committing career suicide. We've all seen people
hurt their careers over tough issues. You may have done it your­
self. Fed up with a lengthy and unhealthy pattern of behavior, you
finally speak out-but a bit too abruptly. Oops. Or maybe an
issue becomes so hot that as your peers twitch and fidget them­
selves into a quivering mass of potential stroke victims, you
decide to say something. It's not a pretty discussion-but some­
body has to have the guts to keep the boss from doing something
stupid. (Gulp.)
As it turns out, you don't have to choose between being hon­
est and being effective. You don't have to choose between candor
and your career. People who routinely hold crucial conversations
and hold them well are able to express controversial and even

=== Page 28 ===
10 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
risky opinions in a way that gets heard. Their bosses, peers, and
direct reports listen without becoming defensive or angry.
What about your career? Are there crucial conversations that
you're not holding or not holding well? Is this undermining your
influence? And more importantly, would your career take a step
forward if you could improve how you're dealing with these
conversations?
Improve Your Organization
Okay, so individual careers may sink or swim based on crucial
conversations, but how about organizations? Surely a soft-and­
gushy factor such as how you talk to one another doesn't have an
impact on the not so soft-and-gushy bottom line.
For twenty-five years we (the authors) explored this very issue.
We (and hundreds of others) searched for keys to organizational
success. Most of us studying the elusive topic figured that some­
thing as large as a company's overall success would depend on
something as large as a company's strategy, structure, or systems.
After all, organizations that maintain best-in-class productivity
rely on elegant performance-management systems. Widespread
productivity couldn't result from anything less, could it? We
weren't alone in our thinking. Every organization that attempted
to bring about improvements-at least the companies we had
heard of-began by revamping their performance-management
systems.
Then we actually studied those who had invested heavily in
spiffy new performance-management systems. It turns out that
we were dead wrong. Changing structures and systems alone did
little to improve performance. For example, one study of five
hundred stunningly productive organizations revealed that peak
performance had absolutely nothing to do with forms, pro­
cedures, and policies that drive performance management. In

=== Page 29 ===
WHAT'S A CRUCIAL CONVERSATION? 11
fact, half of the highflyers had almost no formal performance­
management processes.!
What's behind their success? It all comes down to how people
handle crucial conversations. Within high-performing com­
panies, when employees fail to deliver on their promises, col­
leagues willingly and effectively step in to discuss the problem.
In the worst companies, poor performers are first ignored and
then transferred. In good companies, bosses eventually deal with
problems. In the best companies, everyone holds everyone else
accountable-regardless of level or position. The path to high
productivity passes not through a static system, but through
face-to-face conversations at all levels.
Solve pressing problems. The best companies in almost any
critical area are the ones that have developed the skills for deal­
ing effectively with conversations that relate to that specific
topic. For example:
• Safety. When someone violates a procedure or otherwise acts
in an unsafe way, the first person to see the problem, regard­
less of his or her position, steps up and holds a crucial con­
versation.
• Productivity. If an employee underperforms, fails to live up to
a promise, doesn't carry his or her fair share, or simply isn't
productive enough, the affected parties address the problem
immediately.
• Diversity. When someone feels offended, threatened, insulted,
or harassed, he or she skillfully and comfortably, discusses the
issue with the offending party.
• Quality. In companies where quality rules, people discuss
problems face-to-face when they first come up.
• Ellery other hot topic. Companies that are best-in-class in inno­
vation. teamwork, change management, or any other area that

=== Page 30 ===
12 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
calls for human interaction are best-in-class in holding the rel­
evant crucial conversations.
What's the relationship between success in a key area and crucial
conversations? Companies that make impressive improvements
in key performance areas (and eventually master them) are gen­
erally no different than others in their efforts to improve. They
conduct the same awareness training, print the same banners,
and make the same speeches. They differ in what happens when
someone does something wrong. Rather than waiting for a poli­
cy to kick in or a leader to take charge, people step up, speak up,
and thrive. Equally important, if it's a leader who seems to be out
of line, employees willingly speak up, the problem is solved, and
the company moves on.
So what about you? Is your organization stuck in its progress
toward some important goal? If so, are there conversations that
you're either avoiding or botching? And how about the people
you work with? Are they stepping up to or walking away from
crucial conversations? Could you take a big step forward by
improving how you deal with these conversations?
Improve Your Relationships
Consider the impact crucial conversations can have on your
relationships. Could failed crucial conversations lead to failed
relationships? As it turns out, when you ask the average person
what causes couples to break up, he or she usually suggests that
it's due to differences of opinion. You know, people have differ­
ent theories about how to manage their finances, spice up their
love lives, or rear their children. In truth, everyone argues about
important issues. But not everyone splits up. It's how you argue
that matters.
For example, when Clifford Notarius and Howard Markman
(two noted marriage scholars) examined couples in the throes of

=== Page 31 ===
WHAfS A CRUCIAL CONVERSATION? 13
heated discussions, they learned that people fall into three cate­
gories-those who digress into threats and name-calling, those
who revert to silent fuming, and those who speak openly, hon­
estly, and effectively.
Mter watching dozens of couples, the two scholars predicted
relationship outcomes and tracked their research subjects' rela­
tionships for the next ten years. Sure enough, they had predicted
nearly 90 percent of the divorces that occurred.2 Over time, cou­
ples who found a way to state their opinions about high-stakes,
controversial, and emotional issues honestly and respectfully
remained together. Those who didn't, split up.
Now, what about you? Think of your own important relation­
ships. Are there a few crucial conversations that you're current­
ly avoiding or handling poorly? Do you walk away from some
issues only to come charging back into others? Do you hold in
ugly opinions only to have them tumble out as sarcastic remarks
or cheap shots? How about your significant other or family
members? Are they constantly toggling from seething silence to
subtle but costly attacks? When it matters the most (after all,
these are your cherished loved ones), are you on your worst
behavior? If so, you definitely have something to gain by learn­
ing more about how to handle crucial conversations.
Revitalize Your Community
Next, let's look at our neighborhoods and communities. If the fate
of an organization is largely determined by how pivotal conver­
sations are habitually handled, why should the communities that
surround them be any different? The truth is, they aren't.
The difference between the best communities and the good or
the worst is not the number of problems they have. All commu­
nities face problems. Once again, the difference lies in how they
deal with problems. In the best communities, key individuals

=== Page 32 ===
14 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
and groups find a way to engage in healthy dialogue. They talk
through important issues. In contrast, communities that fail to
improve play costly games. During community meetings peo­
ple insult one another, become indignant, and act as if indi­
viduals with differing views are sick or deranged. Battles
ensue.
In addition to how people behave in public forums, private
behavior affects community health as well. Take, for example,
the problem of crime. You might be shocked to discover a rather
tragic statistic. Not everyone in prison is a career criminal who
was born into a horrible family, then shaped by abuse and neg­
lect into a seething sociopath. In fact, over half of the people
who are convicted of violent crimes are first-time offenders who
3
commit crimes against friends or loved ones.
How could this be? Violence is often preceded by prolonged
periods of silence. Most inmates once held a job, paid their
bills, and remembered their friends' birthdays. Then one day,
after allowing unresolved problems to build up and then boil
over, they attacked a friend, loved one, or neighbor. That's
right, convicted first-time offenders are often not career crimi­
nals. They're our frustrated neighbors. Since they don't know
what to say or how to say it, they opt for force. In this case, the
inability to work through tough issues devastates individuals,
ruins families, and poisons communities.
What about where you live? What crucial issues does your
community face? Are there conversations that people are not
holding or not holding well that keep you from progress? Is
crime skyrocketing? Do your community meetings look more
like the Jerry Springer show than an energetic forum for
healthy communication? If so, both you and the community
have a lot to gain by focusing on how you handle high-stakes
discussions.

=== Page 33 ===
WHArs A CRUCIAL CONVERSATION? 15
Improve Your Personal Health
If the evidence so far isn't compelling enough to focus your
attention on crucial conversations, what would you say if we told
you that the ability to master high-stakes discussions is a key to
a healthier and longer life?
Immune systems. Consider the ground breaking research done
by Dr. Janice Kiecolt-Glaser and Dr. Ronald Glaser. They studied
the immune systems of couples who had been married an aver­
age of forty-two years by comparing those who argued constantly
with those who resolved their differences effectively. It turns out
that arguing for decades doesn 'f lessen the destructive blow of
constant conflict. Quite the contrary. Those who routinely failed
their crucial conversations had far weaker immune systems than
those who found a way to resolve them well.4 Of course, the
weaker the immune system, the worse their health.
Life-threatening diseases. In perhaps the most revealing of all
the health-related studies, a group of subjects who had contracted
malignant melanoma received traditional treatment and then
were divided into two groups. One group met weekly for only six
weeks; the other did not. Facilitators taught the first group of
recovering patients specific communication skills. (When it's
your life that's at stake, could anything be more crucial?)
After meeting only six times and then dispersing for five years,
the subjects who learned how to express themselves effectively
had a higher survival rate-only 9 percent succumbed as opposed
to almost 30 percent in the untrained groUp.5 Think about the
implications of this study. Just a modest improvement in ability to
talk and connect with others corresponded to a two-thirds
decrease in the death rate.
We could go on for pages about how the ability to hold cru­
cial conversations has an impact on your personal health. The
evidence is mounting every day. Nevertheless, most people find

=== Page 34 ===
16 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
this claim a bit over the top. "Come on," they chide. "You're say­
ing that the way you talk or don't talk affects your body? It could
kill you?"
The short answer is yes. The longer answer suggests that the
negative feelings we hold in, the emotional pain we suffer, and
the constant battering we endure as we stumble our way through
unhealthy conversations slowly eat away at our health. In some
cases the impact of failed conversations leads to minor problems.
In others it results in disaster. In all cases, failed conversations
never make us happier, healthier, or better off.
So how about you? What are the specific conversations that
gnaw at you the most? Which conversations (if you held them or
improved them) would strengthen your immune system, help
ward off disease, and increase your quality of life and well-being?
SUMMARY
When stakes are high, opinions vary, and emotions start to run
strong, casual conversations become crucial. Ironically, the more
crucial the conversation, the less likely we are to handle it well.
The consequences of either avoiding or fouling up crucial con­
versations can be severe. When we fail a crucial conversation,
every aspect of our lives can be affected-from our careers, to
our communities, to our relationships, to our personal health.
As we learn how to step up to crucial conversations-and
handle them well-with one set of skills we can influence virtu­
ally every domain of our lives.
What is this all-important skill-set? What do people who sail
through crucial conversations actually do? More importantly,
can we do it too?

=== Page 35 ===
2
Give me a lever long enough
and I shall move the world.
-ARCHIMEDES
Mastering
Crucial
Conversations
The Power of Dialogue
We (the authors) didn't always spend our time noodling over
crucial conversations. In fact, we started our research into orga­
nizational and personal excellence by studying a slightly different
topic. We figured that if we could learn why certain people were
more effective than others, then we could learn exactly what they
did, clone it, and pass it on to others.
To find the source of success, we started at work. We asked
people to identify who they thought were their most effective

=== Page 36 ===
18 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
colleagues. In fact, over the past twenty-five years, we've asked
over twenty thousand people to identify the individuals in their
organizations who could really get things done. We wanted to
find those who were not just influential, but who were far more
influential than the rest.
Each time, as we compiled the names into a list, a pattern
emerged. Some people were named by one or two colleagues.
Some found their way onto the lists of five or six people. These
were the good at influence, but not good enough to be widely
identified as top performers. And then there were the handful
who were named thirty or more times. These were the best-the
clear opinion leaders in their areas. Some were managers and
supervisors. Many were not.
One of the opinion leaders we became particularly interested
in meeting was named Kevin. He was the only one of eight vice
presidents in his company to be identified as exceedingly influ­
ential. We wanted to know why. So we watched him at work.
At first, Kevin didn't do anything remarkable. In truth, he looked
like every other VP. He answered his phone, talked to his direct
reports, and continued about his pleasant, but routine, routine.
The Startling Discovery
After trailing Kevin for almost a week, we began to wonder if he
really did act in ways that set him apart from others or if his
influence was simply a matter of popularity. And then we fol­
lowed Kevin into a meeting.
Kevin, his peers, and their boss were deciding on a new loca­
tion for their offices-would they move across town, across the
state, or across the country? The first two execs presented their
arguments for their top choices, and as expected, their points were
greeted by penetrating questions from the full team. No vague
claim went unclarified, no unsupported reasoning unquestioned.

=== Page 37 ===
MASTERING CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS 19
Then Chris, the CEO, pitched his preference-one that was
both unpopular and potentially disastrous. However, when peo­
ple tried to disagree or push back on Chris, he responded poorly.
Since he was the big boss, he didn't exactly have to browbeat
people to get what he wanted. Instead, he became slightly defen­
sive. First he raised an eyebrow. Then he raised his finger. Finally
he raised his voice-just a little. It wasn't long until people
stopped questioning him, and Chris's inadequate proposal was
quietly accepted.
Well almost. That's when Kevin spoke up. His words were
simple enough-something like, "Hey Chris, can I check some­
thing out with you?"
The reaction was stunning-everyone in the room stopped
breathing. But Kevin ignored the apparent terror of his col­
leagues and plunged on ahead. In the next few minutes he in
essence told the CEO that he appeared to be violating his own
decision-making guidelines. He was subtly using his power to
move the new offices to his hometown.
Kevin continued to explain what he saw happening, and when
he finished the first crucial minutes of this delicate exchange,
Chris was quiet for a moment. Then he nodded his head. "You're
absolutely right," he finally concluded. "I have been trying to
force my opinion on you. Let's back up and try again."
This was a crucial conversation, and Kevin played no games
whatsoever. He didn't resort to silence like his colleagues, nor
did he try to force his arguments on others. As a result, the team
chose a far more reasonable location and Kevin's boss appreci­
ated his candor.
When Kevin was done, one of his peers turned to us and said,
"Did you see how he did that? If you want to know how he gets
things done, figure out what he just did."
So we did. In fact, we spent the next twenty-five years discov­
ering what Kevin and people like him do. What typically set

=== Page 38 ===
20 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
them apart from the rest of the pack was their ability to deal with
crucial conversations. When talking turned tough and stakes
were high, they excelled. But how? Kevin wasn't that different.
He did step up to a tough issue and help the team make a better
choice, but what exactly did he do? Did he possess learnable
skills, or was what he did more magical than manageable?
To answer these questions, first, let's explore what Kevin was
able to achieve. This will help us see where we're trying to go. Then
we'll examine the dialogue tools effective communicators routinely
use and learn to apply them to our own crucial conversations.
THE "ONE THING"
If you've seen the movie City Slickers, you may remember a scene
where the crusty character Curly explains that if you want to suc­
ceed in life you have to do one thing. Then, in typical Hollywood
fashion, he explains that he's not about to tell you what that one
thing is. You have to figure it out yourself.
We won't pull a Curly. We'll reveal the one thing. When it
comes to risky, controversial, and emotional conversations, skilled
people find a way to get all relevant information (from themselves
and others) out into the open.
That's it. At the core of every successful conversation lies the
free flow of relevant information. People openly and honestly
express their opinions, share their feelings, and articulate their
theories. They willingly and capably share their views, even when
their ideas are controversial or unpopular. It's the one thing, and
it's precisely what Kevin and the other extremely effective com­
municators we studied were routinely able to achieve.
Now, to put a label on this spectacular talent-it's called dia­
logue.
di·a·logue or di·a·log (di' a-lOg", -log) n
The free flow of meaning between two or more people.

=== Page 39 ===
MASTERING CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS 21
HERE'S HOW DIALOGUE WORKS
Despite the fact that we've shared the one thing, we're still left
with two questions. First, how does this free flow of meaning lead
to success? Second, what can you do to encourage meaning to
flow freely?
We'll explain the relationship between the free flow of mean­
ing and success right here and now. The second question-what
you must do to stay in dialogue, no matter the circumstances­
takes the rest of the book.
Filling the Pool of Shared Meaning
Each of us enters conversations with our own opinions, feelings,
theories, and experiences about the topic at hand. This unique
combination of thoughts and feelings makes up our personal
pool of meaning. This pool not only informs us but also propels
our every action.
When two or more of us enter crucial conversations, by defi­
nition we don't share the same pool. Our opinions differ. I
believe one thing, you another. I have one history, you another.
People who are skilled at dialogue do their best to make it safe
for everyone to add their meaning to the shared pool-even
ideas that at first glance appear controversial, wrong, or at odds
with their own beliefs. Now, obviously they don't agree with
every idea; they simply do their best to ensure that all ideas find
their way into the open.
As the Pool of Shared Meaning grows, it helps people in
two ways. First, as individuals are exposed to more accurate
and relevant information, they make better choices. In a very
real sense, the Pool of Shared Meaning is a measure of a
group's IQ. The larger the shared pool, the smarter the deci­
sions. And even though many people may be involved in a
choice. when people openly and freely share ideas, the

=== Page 40 ===
22 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
increased time investment is more than offset by the quality of
the decision.
On the other hand, we've all seen what happens when the
shared pool is dangerously shallow. When people purposefully
withhold meaning from one another, individually smart people
can do collectively stupid things.
For example, a client of ours shared the following story.
A woman checked into the hospital to have a tonsillectomy,
and the surgical team erroneously removed a portion of her foot.
How could this tragedy happen? In fact, why is it that ninety­
eight thousand hospital deaths each year stem from human
error?! In part because many health-care professionals are afraid
to speak their minds. In this case, no less than seven people won­
dered why the surgeon was working on the foot, but said noth­
ing. Meaning didn't freely flow because people were afraid to
speak up.
Of course, hospitals don't have a monopoly on fear. In every
instance where bosses are smart, highly paid, confident, and out­
spoken (i.e., most of the world), people tend to hold back their
opinions rather than risk angering someone in a position of power.
On the other hand, when people feel comfortable speaking up
and meaning does flow freely, the shared pool can dramatically
increase a group's ability to make better decisions. Consider what
happened to Kevin's group. As everyone on the team began to
explain his or her opinion, people formed a more clear and com­
plete picture of the circumstances.
As they began to understand the whys and wherefores of dif­
ferent proposals, they built off one another. Eventually, as one
idea led to the next, and then to the next, they came up with an
alternative that no one had originally thought of and that all
wholeheartedly supported. As a result of the free flow of mean­
ing, the whole (final choice) was truly greater than the sum of the
original parts. In short:

=== Page 41 ===
MASTERING CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS 23
The Pool of Shared Meaning
is the birthplace of synergy.
Not only does a shared pool help individuals make better
choices, but since the meaning is shared, people willingly act on
whatever decisions they make. As people sit through an open
discussion where ideas are shared, they take part in the free flow
of meaning. Eventually they understand why the shared solution
is the best solution, and they're committed to act. For example,
Kevin and the other VPs didn't buy into their final choice simply
because they were involved; they bought in because they under­
stood.
Conversely, when people aren't involved, when they sit back
quietly during touchy conversations, they're rarely committed to
the final decision. Since their ideas remain in their heads and
their opinions never make it into the pool, they end up quietly
criticizing and passively resisting. Worse still, when others force
their ideas into the pool, people have a harder time accepting the
information. They may say they're on board, but then walk away
and follow through halfheartedly. To quote Samuel Butler, "He
that complies against his will is of his own opinion still."
The time you spend up front establishing a shared pool of
meaning is more than paid for by faster, more committed action
later on.
For example, if Kevin and the other leaders had not been
committed to their relocation decision, terrible consequences
would have followed. Some people would have agreed to move;
others would have dragged their feet. Some would have held
heated discussions in the hallways. Others would have said noth­
ing and then quietly fought the plan. More likely than not, the
team would have been forced to meet again, discuss again, and
decide again-since only one person favored the decision and the
decision affected everyone.

=== Page 42 ===
24 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
Now, don't get us wrong. We're not suggesting that every
decision be made by consensus or that the boss shouldn't take
part in or even make the final choice. We're simply suggesting
that whatever the decision-making method, the greater the
shared meaning in the pool, the better the choice-whoever
makes it.
Every time we find ourselves arguing, debating, running away,
or otherwise acting in an ineffective way, it's because we don't
know how to share meaning. Instead of engaging in healthy dia­
logue, we play silly and costly games.
For instance, sometimes we move to silence. We play Salute
and Stay Mute. That is, we don't confront people in positions of
authority. Or at home we may play Freeze Your Lover. With this
tortured technique we give loved ones the cold shoulder in order
to get them to treat us better (what's the logic in that?).
Sometimes we rely on hints, sarcasm, innuendo, and looks of
disgust to make our points. We play the martyr and then pretend
we're actually trying to help. Afraid to confront an individual, we
blame an entire team for a problem-hoping the message will hit
the right target. Whatever the technique, the overall method is
the same. We withhold meaning from the pool. We go to silence.
On other occasions, not knowing how to stay in dialogue, we
rely on violence-anything from subtle manipulation to verbal
attacks. We act like we know everything, hoping people will
believe our arguments. We discredit others, hoping people won't
believe their arguments. And then we use every manner of force
to get our way. We borrow power from the boss; we hit people
with biased monologues. The goal, of course, is always the
same-to compel others to our point of view.
Now, here's how the various elements fit together. When stakes
are high, opinions vary, and emotions run strong, we're often at
our worst. In order to move to our best, we have to find a way to
explain what is in each of our personal pools of meaning-

=== Page 43 ===
MASTERING CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS 25
especially our high-stakes, sensitive, and controversial opinions,
feelings, and ideas-and to get others to share their pools. We
have to develop the tools that make it safe for us to discuss these
issues and to come to a shared pool of meaning. And when we do,
our lives change.
DIALOGUE SKILLS ARE LEARNABLE
And now for the really good news. The skills required to master
high-stakes interactions are quite easy to spot and moderately
easy to learn. First consider the fact that a well-handled crucial
conversation all but leaps out at you. In fact, when you see some­
one enter the dangerous waters of a high-stakes, high-emotion,
controversial discussion-and the person does a particularly
good job-your natural reaction is to step back in awe. "Wow!"
is generally the first word out of your mouth. What starts as a
doomed discussion ends up with a healthy resolution. It can take
your breath away.
More importantly, not only are dialogue skills easy to spot, but
they're also fairly easy to learn. That's where we're going next.
We've isolated and captured the skills of the dialogue-gifted
through twenty-five years of nonstop "Wow!" research. First we
followed around Kevin and dozens like him. Then, when conver­
sations turned crucial, we took detailed notes. Afterward we
compared our observations, tested our hypotheses, and honed
our models until we found the skills that consistently explain the
success of brilliant communicators. Finally, we combined our
philosophies, theories, models, and skills into a package of learn­
able tools-tools for talking when stakes are high.
Now we're ready to share what we've learned. Stay with us as
we explore how to transform crucial conversations from fright­
ening events into interactions that yield success and results. It's
the mosl important set of skills you'll ever master.

=== Page 44 ===
26 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
HERE'S WHERE WE'RE GOING
Here's what we'll focus on in the remainder of the book.
First, we'll explore the tools people use to help create the con­
ditions of dialogue. The focus is on how we think about problem
situations and what we do to prepare for them. As we work on
ourselves, watch for problems, examine our own thought
processes, discover our own styles, and then catch problems
before they get out of hand, everyone benefits. As you read on,
you will learn how to create conditions in yourself and others
that make dialogue the path of least resistance.
Next, we'll examine the tools for talking, listening, and acting
together. This is what most people have in mind when they think
of crucial conversations. How do I express delicate feedback?
How do I speak persuasively, not abrasively? And how about lis­
tening? Or better still, what can we do to get people to talk when
they seem nervous? And how do we move from thought to
action? As you read on, you will learn the key skills of talking,
listening, and acting together.
Finally, we'll tie all of the theories and skills together by pro­
viding both a model and an extended example. Then, to see if
you can really do what it takes, we provide seventeen situations
that would give most of us fits-even people who are gifted at
dialogue. As you read on, you will master the tools for talking
when stakes are high.

=== Page 45 ===
3
More than any time in history mankind faces
a
crossroads. One path leads to despair and utter
hopelessness, the other to total extinction. Let us
pray that we have the wisdom to choose correctly.
-WOODY ALLEN
Start with Heart
How to Stay Focused
on What You Really Want
It's time to tum to the how of dialogue. How do you encourage
the flow of meaning in the face of differing opinions and strong
emotions? Given the average person's track record, it can't be all
that easy. In fact, given most people's long-standing habit of cost­
ly behaviors, it'll probably require a lot of effort. The truth is,
people can change. In fact, thousands of people we (the authors)
have worked with over the past decades have made lasting
improvements. But it requires work. You can't simply drink a
magic potion and walk away renewed. Instead, you'll need to
take a long hard look at yourself.
In fact, this is the first principle of dialogue-Start with
l leart. That is, your own heart. If you can't get yourself right,

=== Page 46 ===
28 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
you'll have a hard time getting dialogue right. When conversa­
tions become crucial you'll resort to the forms of communication
that you've grown up with-debate, silent treatment, manipula­
tion, and so on.
WHEN WE DON'T WORK ON ME FIRST
Let's start with a true story. Two young sisters and their father scur­
ry into their hotel room after spending a hot afternoon at Disney­
land. Given the repressive heat, the girls have consumed enough
soda pop to fill a small barrel. As the two bursting kids enter their
room, they have but one thought-to head for the head.
Since the bathroom is a one-holer, it isn't long until a fight
breaks out. Both of the desperate children start arguing, pushing,
and name-calling as they dance around the tiny bathroom. Event­
ually one calls out to her father for help.
"Dad, 1 got here first!"
"I know, but 1 need to go worse!"
"How do you know? You're not in my body. 1 didn't even go
before we left this morning!"
"You're so selfish."
Dad proposes a plan. "Girls, I'm not going to solve this for
you. You can stay in the bathroom and figure out who goes first
and who goes second. There's only one rule. No hitting."
As the two antsy kids begin their crucial conversation, Dad
checks his watch. He wonders how long it'll take. As the minutes
slowly tick away, he hears nothing more than an occasional out­
burst of sarcasm. Finally after twenty-five long minutes, the toi­
let flushes. One girl comes out. A minute later, another flush and
out walks her sister. With both girls in the room, Dad asks, "Do
you know how many times both of you could have gone to the
bathroom in the time it took you to work that out?"
The idea had not occurred to the little scamps, but the instant
it does, it's obvious what both immediately conclude.

=== Page 47 ===
START WITH HEART 29
"Lots of times, if she hadn't been such a jerk."
"Listen to her. She's calling me names when she could have
just waited. She always has to have her way!"
DON'T LOOK AT ME!
Laugh as we may at this story, these two kids behave no differ­
ently from the rest of us. When faced with a failed conversation,
most of us are quick to blame others. If others would only
change, then we'd all live happily ever after. If others weren't so
screwed up, we wouldn't have to resort to silly games in the first
place. They started it. It's their fault, not ours. And so on.
Although it's true that there are times when we are merely
bystanders in life's never-ending stream of head-on collisions,
rarely are we completely innocent. More often than not, we do
something to contribute to the problems we're experiencing.
People who are best at dialogue understand this simple fact and
tum it into the principle "Work on me first." They realize that not
only are they likely to benefit by improving their own approach,
but also that they're the only person they can work on anyway. As
much as others may need to change, or we may want them to
change, the only person we can continually inspire, prod, and
shape-with any degree of success-is the person in the mirror.
There's a certain irony embedded in this fact. People who
believe they need to start with themselves do just that. As they
work on themselves, they also become the most skilled at dia­
logue. So here's the irony. It's the most talented, not the least tal­
ented, who are continually trying to improve their dialogue
skills. As is often the case, the rich get richer.
START WITH HEART
Okay, let's assume we need to work on our own personal dia­
lugue skills. Instead of buying this book and then handing it to a

=== Page 48 ===
30 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
loved one or coworker and saying: "You'll love this, especially
the parts that I've underlined for you," we'll try to figure out how
we ourselves can benefit. But how? Where do we start? How can
we stay clear of unhealthy games?
Although it's difficult to describe the specific order of events
in an interaction as fluid as a crucial conversation, we do know
one thing for certain: Skilled people Start with Heart. That is,
they begin high-risk discussions with the right motives, and they
stay focused no matter what happens.
They maintain this focus in two ways. First, they're steely-eyed
smart when it comes to knowing what they want. Despite con­
stant invitations to slip away from their goals, they stick with
them. Second, skilled people don't make Sucker's Choices
(either/or choices). Unlike others who justify their unhealthy
behavior by explaining that they had no choice but to fight or
take flight, the dialogue-smart believe that dialogue, no matter
the circumstances, is always an option.
Let's look at each of these important heart-based assumptions
in turn.
A MOMENT OF TRUTH
To see how the desires of our hearts can affect our ability to stay
in dialogue, let's take a look at a real-life example.
Greta, the CEO of a mid-sized corporation, is two hours into
a rather tense meeting with her top leaders. For the past six
months she has been on a personal campaign to reduce costs.
Little has been accomplished to date, so Greta calls the meeting.
Surely people will tell her why they haven't started cutting costs.
After all, she has taken great pains to foster candor.
Greta has just opened the meeting to questions when a man­
ager haltingly rises to his feet, fidgets, stares at the floor, and
then nervously asks if he can ask a very tough question. The way

=== Page 49 ===
START WITH HEART 31
the fellow emphasizes the word very makes it sound as if he's
about to accuse Greta of kidnapping the Lindbergh baby.
The frightened manager continues.
"Greta, you've been at us for six months to find ways to cut
costs. I'd be lying if I said that we've given you much more than
a lukewarm response. If you don't mind, I'd like to tell you about
one thing that's making it tough for us to push for cost cuts."
"Great. Fire away," Greta says as she smiles in response.
"Well, while you've been asking us to use both sides of our paper
and forego improvements, you're having a second office built."
Greta freezes and turns bright red. Everyone looks to see what
will happen next. The manager plunges on ahead.
"The rumor is that the furniture alone will cost $150,000. Is
that right?"
So there we have it. The conversation has just turned crucial.
Someone has just poured a rather ugly tidbit into the pool of
meaning. Will Greta continue to encourage honest feedback, or
will she shut the fellow down?
We call this a crucial conversation because how Greta acts
during the next few moments will not only set people's attitudes
toward the proposed cost cutting, but will also have a huge
impact on what the other leaders think about her. Does she walk
the talk of openness and honesty? Or is she a raging hypocrite­
like so many of the senior executives who came before her?
Will We Get Hooked?
How Greta behaves during this crucial conversation depends a
great deal on how she handles her emotions while under attack.
Sure, when she's giving a speech or writing a memo, she's all for
candor. She's a veritable cheerleader for candor. But what about
now? Will Greta thank the fellow for taking a huge risk and
being honest?

=== Page 50 ===
32 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
If she's like most of us, Greta will defend herself. When we're
in the throes of high-stakes conversations, new (and less healthy)
motives often supplant our original, more noble ones. If you are
standing in front of a potentially hostile crowd, it's a good bet
you will change your original goal to the new goal of protecting
your public image.
"Excuse me," you might respond. "I don't think that my new
office is an appropriate topic for this forum."
Bang. You're dead. In one fell swoop you've lost buy-in,
destroyed any hope for candor in this particular conversation,
and confirmed everyone's suspicion that you want honesty-but
only as long as it makes you look good.
FIRST, FOCUS ON WHAT YOU REAllY WANT
In reality, Greta didn't give in to her raging desire to defend her­
self. After being accused of not following her own advice, at first
she looked surprised, embarrassed, and maybe even a little
upset. Then she took a deep breath and said: "You know what?
We need to talk about this. I'm glad you asked the question. It'll
give us a chance to discuss what's really going on."
And then Greta talked turkey. She explained that she felt the
office was necessary but admitted that she had no idea what it
would cost. So she sent someone to check the numbers.
Meanwhile, she explained that building the office was a response
to marketing's advice to boost the company's image and improve
client confidence. And while Greta would use the office, it would
be primarily a hosting location for marketing. When she saw the
figures for the office, Greta was stunned and admitted that she
should have checked the costs before signing a work order. So
then and there she committed to drawing up a new plan that
would cut costs by half or canceling the project entirely.

=== Page 51 ===
START WITH HEART 33
Later that day we asked Greta how she had been able to keep
her composure under fire. We wanted to know exactly what had
been going on in her head. What had helped her move from
embarrassment and anger to gratitude?
"It was easy," Greta explained. "At first I did feel attacked,
and I wanted to strike back. To be honest, I wanted to put that
guy in his place. He was accusing me in public and he was
wrong."
"And then it struck me," she continued. "Despite the fact that I
had four hundred eyeballs pinned to me, a rather important ques­
tion hit me like a ton of bricks: 'What do I really want here?'"
Asking this question had a powerful effect on Greta's think­
ing. As she focused on this far more important question, she
quickly realized that her goal was to encourage these two hun­
dred managers to embrace the cost-reduction efforts-and to
thereby influence thousands of others to do the same.
As Greta contemplated this goal, she realized that the biggest
barrier she faced was the widespread belief that she was a hyp­
ocrite. On the one hand, she was calling for others to sacrifice.
On the other, she appeared to be spending discretionary funds for
her own comfort. It was at that moment that she was no longer
ashamed or angry, but grateful. She couldn't have asked for a bet­
ter opportunity to influence these leaders than the one offered up
by this penetrating question. And so she moved to dialogue.
Refocus your brain. Now, let's move to a situation you might
face. You're speaking with someone who completely disagrees
with you on a hot issue. How does all of this goal stuff apply? As
you begin the discussion, start by examining your motives. Going
in, ask yourself what you really want.
Also, as the conversation unfolds and you find yourself start­
ing to, say, defer to the boss or give your spouse the cold shoul­
der, pay attention to what's happening to your objectives. Are

=== Page 52 ===
34 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
you starting to change your goal to save face, avoid embarrass­
ment, win, be right, or punish others? Here's the tricky part. Our
motives usually change without any conscious thought on our
part. When adrenaline does our thinking for us, our motives flow
with the chemical tide.
In order to move back to motives that allow for dialogue, you
must step away from the interaction and look at yourself­
much like an outsider. Ask yourself: "What am I doing, and if I
had to guess, what does it tell me about my underlying motive?"
As you make an honest effort to discover your motive, you
might conclude: "Let's see. I'm pushing hard, making the argu­
ment stronger than I actually believe, and doing anything to
win. I've shifted from trying to select a vacation location to try­
ing to win an argument."
Once you call into question the shifting desires of your heart,
you can make conscious choices to change them. "What I really
want is to genuinely try to select a vacation spot we can all
enjoy-rather than try to win people over to my ideas." Put suc­
cinctly, when you name the game, you can stop playing it.
But how? How do you recognize what has happened to you,
stop playing games, and then influence your own motives? Do
what Greta did. Stop and ask yourself some questions that
return you to dialogue. You can ask these questions either when
you find yourself slipping out of dialogue or as reminders when
you prepare to step up to a crucial conversation. Here are some
great ones:
What do I really want for myself?
What do I really want for others?
What do I really want for the relationship?
Once you've asked yourself what you want, add one more
equally telling question:

=== Page 53 ===
START WITH HEART 35
How would I behave if I really wanted these results?
Find your bearings. There are two good reasons for asking these
questions. First, the answer to what we really want helps us to
locate our own North Star. Despite the fact that we're being tempt­
ed to take the wrong path by (1) people who are trying to pick a
fight, (2) thousands of years of genetic hardwiring that brings our
emotions to a quick boil, and (3) our deeply ingrained habit of try­
ing to win, our North Star returns us to our original purpose.
"What do I really want? Oh yeah, I guess it's not to make
the other person squirm or to preen in front of a crowd. I
want people to freely and openly talk about what it'll take
to cut costs."
Take charge of your body. The second reason for asking what
we really want is no less important. When we ask ourselves what
we really want, we affect our entire physiology. As we introduce
complex and abstract questions to our mind, the problem-solv­
ing part of our brain recognizes that we are now dealing with
intricate social issues and not physical threats. When we present
our brain with a demanding question, our body sends precious
blood to the parts of our brain that help us think, and away from
the parts of our body that help us take flight or begin a fight.
Asking questions about what we really want serves two
important purposes. First, it reminds us of our goal. Second, it
juices up our brain in a way that helps us keep focused.
Common Deviations
As we step up to a crucial conversation, fully intending to stim­
ulate the flow of meaning, many of us quickly change our origi­
Ilal objectives to much less healthy goals. For instance, when
Greta fell under public attack, her immediate reaction was to do

=== Page 54 ===
36 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
whatever it took to save face. Other common, but not·all-that­
healthy, objectives include wanting to win, seeking revenge, and
hoping to remain safe.
Wanting to win. This particular dialogue killer sits at the top
of many of our lists. Heaven only knows that we come by this
deadly passion naturally enough. Half of the lV programs we
watch make heroes out of people who win at sports or game
shows. Ten minutes into kindergarten we learn that if we want
to get the teacher's attention, we have to spout the right answer.
That means we have to beat our fellow students at the same
game. This desire to win is built into our very fiber before we're
old enough to know what's going on.
Unfortunately, as we grow older, most of us don't realize that
this desire to win is continually driving us away from healthy dia­
logue. We start out with the goal of resolving a problem, but as
soon as someone raises the red flag of inaccuracy or challenges
our correctness, we switch purposes in a heartbeat.
First we correct the facts. We quibble over details and point
out flaws in the other person's arguments.
"You're wrong! We're not spending anywhere near a hun­
dred and fifty thousand dollars on the furniture. It's the
redesign of the office that's costing so much, not the fur­
niture."
Of course, as others push back, trying to prove their points,
it's not long until we change our goal from correcting mistakes
to winning.
If you doubt this simple allegation, think of the two antsy
young girls as they stared each other down in the cramped bath­
room. Their original goal was simple enough-relief. But soon,
caught up in their own painful game, the two set their jaws and
committed to doing whatever it took to win-even if it brought
them a fair amount of personal discomfort.

=== Page 55 ===
START WITH HEART 37
Seeking revenge. Sometimes, as our anger increases, we move
from wanting to win the point to wanting to harm the other per­
son. Just ask Greta. "To heck with honest communication!" she
thinks to herself. "I'll teach the moron not to attack me in pub­
lic." Eventually, as emotions reach their peak, our goal becomes
completely perverted. We move so far away from adding mean­
ing to the pool that now all we want is to see others suffer.
"I can't believe that you're accusing me of squandering
good money on a perfectly fine office. Now, if nobody else
has any intelligent questions, let's move on!"
Everyone immediately clams up and looks at the floor. The
silence is deafening.
Hoping to remain safe. Of course, we don't always fix mis­
takes, aggressively discredit others, or heartlessly try to make
them suffer. Sometimes we choose personal safety over dialogue.
Rather than add to the pool of meaning, and possibly make
waves along the way, we go to silence. We're so uncomfortable
with the immediate conflict that we accept the certainty of bad
results to avoid the possibility of uncomfortable conversation.
We choose (at least in our minds) peace over conflict. Had this
happened in Greta's case, nobody would have raised concerns
over the new office, Greta never would have learned the real
issue, and people would have continued to drag their feet.
SECOND, REFUSE THE SUCKER'S CHOICE
Now, let's add one more tool that helps us focus on what we real­
ly want. We'll start with a story.
The faculty of Beaumont High School is hashing out possible
curriculum changes in an after-school meeting that's been going
on for hours. It's finally the science department's turn to present.
Roycc, a chemistry tcacher who's been at Beaumont for

=== Page 56 ===
38 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
thirty-three years, considers himself the elder statesman of
the school. He's much more fond of war stories than he is of
neutrons and electrons, but the administration kind of turns
a blind eye, because the guy's a fixture.
At the principal's cue, Royce clears his throat and begins to
yammer on incoherently about the similarities between curricu­
lum development and battle preparations. His antics are so
embarrassing that the audience quietly heaves their shoulders as
they futilely try to stifle their laughter.
Next, it's Brent's, the new guy's, turn. A couple of weeks ago,
the principal asked him to outline the science department's pro­
posed curriculum changes. Brent met with his colleagues (even
Royce), gathered suggestions, and came ready to present.
As Brent begins, Royce starts demonstrating bayonet offen­
sives with a yardstick, and Brent snaps. Slamming his fist on the
table, he shouts, "Am I the only one who wonders why we even
allow this fosil to talk? Did he miss a pill or something?"
A room full of stunned faces turns toward Brent. Realizing
that his colleagues must think he's possessed, Brent utters those
words we've all come to hate, "Hey, don't look at me like that!
I'm the only one around who has the guts to speak the truth."
What a tactic. Brent slams Royce in public, and then instead
of apologizing or maybe simply fading into the shadows, he
argues that what he just did was somehow noble.
Two ugly options. This pernicious strategy is particularly well
suited for keeping us off track. It's known as a Sucker's Choice.
In order to justify an especially sordid behavior, we suggest that
we're caught between two distasteful options. Either we can be
honest and attack our spouse, or we can be kind and withhold
the truth. Either we can disagree with the boss to help make a
better choice-and get shot for it-or we can remain quiet,
starve the pool, and keep our job. Pick your poison.

=== Page 57 ===
START WITH HEART 39
What makes these Sucker's Choices is that they're always
set up as the only two options available. It's the worst of
either/or thinking. The person making the choice never sug­
gests there's a third option that doesn't call for unhealthy
behavior. For example, maybe there's a way to be honest and
respectful. Perhaps we can express our candid opinion to our
boss and be safe.
Those offering up a Sucker's Choice either don't think of a
third (and healthy) option-in which case it's an honest but
tragic mistake-or set up the false dichotomy as a way of jus­
tifying their unattractive actions. "I'm sorry, but I just had to
destroy the guy's self-image if I was going to keep my integrity.
It wasn't pretty, but it was the right thing to do."
Open Yourself to Change
Not only do Sucker's Choices set us up to take ineffective
actions, but they close us down to change. They present our
brain with problems easily solved with restricted blood flow.
After all, if we are simply choosing between fight and flight,
who needs much creative thought?
They also keep us stuck in ineffective strategies by justifying
our attacking or retreating behaviors. Why alter our behavior
when we're the only one savvy enough to keep quiet? "Stand
up to my boss? What turnip wagon did you just fall off?" "Tell
my spouse that her parental style is too controlling? No way.
I'll pay for years." In a similar vein, why would you ever change
when you think you're the only one around with an ounce of
integrity? "Somebody has to state the ugly truth. It's the only
way I can look myself in the mirror."
In summary, Sucker's Choices are simplistic tradeoffs that
keep us rr om thinking creatively of ways to get to dialogue, and
that justify our silly games.

=== Page 58 ===
40 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
So how do we break away from perverted logic that keeps us
trapped in hurtful behavior?
Search for the Elusive And
The best at dialogue refuse Sucker's Choices by setting up new
choices. They present themselves with tougher questions­
questions that turn the either/or choice into a search for the all­
important and ever-elusive and. (It is an endangered species,
you know.) Here's how this works.
First, clarify what you really want. You've got a head start if
you've already Started with Heart. If you know what you want
for yourself, for others, and for the relationship, then you're in
position to break out of the Sucker's Choice.
"What I want is for my husband to be more reliable. I'm
tired of being let down by him when he makes commit­
ments that I depend on."
Second, clarify what you really don't want. This is the key to
framing the and question. Think of what you are afraid will
happen to you if you back away from your current strategy of
trying to win or stay safe. What bad thing will happen if you
stop pushing so hard? Or if you don't try to escape? What hor­
rible outcome makes game-playing an attractive and sensible
option?
"What I don't want is to have a useless and heated conver­
sation that creates bad feelings and doesn't lead to change."
Third, present your brain with a more complex problem.
Finally, combine the two into an and question that forces you to
search for more creative and productive options than silence and
violence.

=== Page 59 ===
START WITH HEART 41
"How can I have a candid conversation with my husband
about being more dependable and avoid creating bad feel­
ings or wasting our time?"
It's interesting to watch what happens when people are pre­
sented with and questions after being stuck with Sucker's
Choices. Their faces become reflective, their eyes open wider,
and they begin to think. With surprising regularity, when people
are asked: "Is it possible that there's a way to accomplish both?"
they acknowledge that there very well may be.
Is there a way to tell your peer your real concerns and not insult
or offend him?
Is there a way to talk to your neighbors about their annoying
behavior and not come across as self-righteous or demanding?
Is there a way to talk with your loved one about how you're
spending money and not get into an argument?
IS THIS REAllY POSSIBLE?
Some people find this whole line of thinking comically unrealis­
tic. From their point of view, Sucker's Choices aren't false
dichotomies; they're merely a reflection of an unfortunate reality.
"You can't say something to the boss about our upcoming
move. It'll cost you your job."
To these people we say: Remember Kevin? He, and almost every
other opinion leader we've ever studied, has what it takes to speak
up and maintain respect. Maybe you don't know what Kevin did or
what you need to do-but don't deny the existence of Kevin or peo­
ple like him. There is a third set of options out there that allows you
tu add meaning to the pool and build on the relationship.

=== Page 60 ===
42 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
When we (the authors) are in the middle of an on-site work­
shop and we suggest there are alternatives to Sucker's Choicesj
someone invariably says: "Maybe you can speak honestly and
still be heard in other organizations, but if you try it here, you'll
be eaten alive!" Or the flip side: "You've got to know when to
fold if you want to survive for another day." Then in a hail of "I'll
say!" and "Here, here!" many nod in agreement.
At first, we thought that maybe there were places where dia­
logue couldn't survive. But then we learned to ask: "Are you say­
ing there isn't anyone you know who is able to hold a high-risk
conversation in a way that solves problems and builds relation­
ships?" There usually is.
SUMMARY-START WITH HEART
Here's how people who are skilled at dialogue stay focused on
their goals-particularly when the going gets tough.
Work on Me First
• Remember that the only person you can directly control is
yourself.
Focus on What You Really Want
• When you find yourself moving toward silence or violencej
stop and pay attention to your motives.
• Ask yourself: "What does my behavior tell me about what
my motives are?"
• Then, clarify what you really want. Ask yourself: "What do
I want for myself? For others? For the relationship?"
• And finally, ask: "How would I behave if this were what I
really wanted?"

=== Page 61 ===
START WITH HEART 43
Refuse the Sucker's Choice
• As you consider what you want, notice when you start talking
yourself into a Sucker's Choice.
• Watch to see if you're telling yourself that you must choose
between peace and honesty, between winning and losing,
and so on.
• Break free of these Sucker's Choices by searching for the
and.
• Clarify what you don't want, add it to what you do want,
and ask your brain to start searching for healthy options to
bring you to dialogue.

=== Page 63 ===
I have known a thousand scampsi
but I never met one who considered himself so.
Self-knowledge isn't common.
50
-OUiDA
learn to look
How to Notice When Safety
Is at Risk
Let's start this chapter by visiting a crucial conversation. You've
just ended a heated debate with a group of people you supervise.
What started out as a harmless discussion about your new shift
rotations ended up as a nasty argument. Mter an hour of carping
and complaining, you finally went to your separate comers.
You're now walking down the hall wondering what happened.
In a matter of minutes an innocent discussion had transformed
into a crucial conversation, and then into a failed conversation­
and you can't recall why. You do remember a tense moment
when you started pushing your point of view a bit too hard
(okay, maybe way too hard) and eight people stared at you as if
you had just bitten the head off a chicken. But then the meeting
ended.

=== Page 64 ===
46 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
What you don't realize is that two of your friends are walking
down the hallway in the opposite direction conducting a play-by­
play of the meeting. They do know what took place.
"It happened again. The boss started pushing so hard for per­
sonal agenda items that we all began to act defensively. Did you
notice how at one point all of our jaws dropped simultaneously?
Of course, I was just as bad as the boss. I spoke in absolutes,
only pointed out facts that supported my view, and then ended
with a list of outlandish claims. I got hooked like a marlin."
Later that day as you talk to your friends about the meeting,
they let you in on what happened. You were there, but somehow
you missed what actually happened.
"That's because you were so caught up in the content of the
conversation," your buddy explains. "You cared so deeply about
the shift rotation that you were blind to the conditions. You
know-how people were feeling and acting, what tone they were
taking, stuff like that."
"You saw all that while still carrying on a heated conversa­
tion?" you ask.
"Yeah," your coworker explains, "I always dual-process. That
is, when things start turning ugly, I watch the content of the con­
versation along with what people are doing. I look for and exam­
ine both what and why. If you can see why people are becoming
upset or holding back their views or even going silent, you can
do something to get back on track."
"You look at the 'conditions,' and then you know what to do to
get back on track?"
"Sometimes," your friend answers. "But you've got to learn
exactly what to look for."
"It's a form of social first aid. By watching for the moment a con­
versation starts turning unhealthy, you can respond quickly. The
sooner you catch a problem, the sooner you'll be able to work your
way back to healthy dialogue, and the less severe the damage."

=== Page 65 ===
LEARN TO LOOK 47
You can't believe how obvious this advice is-and yet you've
never thought of such a thing. Weirder still, your friend has. In
fact, he has a whole vocabulary for what's going on during a cru­
cial conversation. It's as if you've been speaking another language.
WATCH FOR CONDITIONS
In truth, most of us do have trouble dual-processing (watching
for content and conditions)-especially when it comes to a cru­
cial conversation. When both stakes and emotions are high, we
get so caught up in what we're saying that it can be nearly impos­
sible to pull ourselves out of the argument in order to see what's
happening to ourselves and to others. Even when we are startled
by what's going on, enough so that we think: "Yipes! This has
turned ugly. Now what?" we may not know what to look for in
order to turn things around. We may not see enough of what's
happening.
How could that be? How could we be smack-dab in the mid­
dle of a heated debate and not really see what's going on? A
metaphor might help. It's akin to going fly fishing for the first
time with an experienced angler. Your buddy keeps telling you to
cast your fly six feet upstream from that brown trout "just out
there." Only you can't see a brown trout "just out there." He can.
That's because he knows what to look for. You think you do. You
think you need to look for a brown trout. In reality, you need to
look for a brown trout that's under water while the sun is reflect­
ing in your eyes. You have to look for elements other than the
thing that your dad has stuffed and mounted over the fireplace.
I t takes both knowledge and practice to know what to look for
and then actually see it.
So what do you look for when caught in the middle of a cru­
cial conversation? What do you need to see in order to catch
problems before they become too severe? Actually, it helps to
watch fot' three different conditions: the moment a conversation

=== Page 66 ===
48 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
turns crucial, signs that people don't feel safe (silence or vio­
lence), and your own Style Under Stress. Let's consider each of
these conversation killers in turn.
learn to Spot Crucial Conversations
First, stay alert for the moment a conversation turns from a rou­
tine or harmless discussion into a crucial one. In a similar vein,
as you anticipate entering a tough conversation, pay heed to the
fact that you're about to enter the danger zone. Otherwise, yoti
can easily get sucked into silly games before you realize what's
happened. And as we suggested earlier, the further you stray off
track, the harder it can be to return.
To help catch problems early, reprogram your mind to pay
attention to the signs that suggest you're in a crucial conversa­
tion. Some people first notice physical signals-their stomach
gets tight or their eyes get dry. Think about what happens to your
body when conversations get tough. Everyone is a little bit dif·
ferent. What are your cues? Whatever they are, learn to look at
them as signs to step back, slow down, and Start with Heart before
things get out of hand.
Others notice their emotions before they notice signs in theit
body. They realize they are scared, hurt, or angry and are begin­
ning to react to or suppress these feelings. These emotions can
also be great cues to tell you to step back, slow down, and take
steps to turn your brain back on.
Some people's first cue is not physical or emotional, but
behavioral. It's like an out-of-body experience. They see them­
selves raising their voice, pointing their finger like a loaded
weapon, or becoming very quiet. It's only then that they realize
how they're feeling.
So take a moment to think about some of your toughest con­
versations. What cues can you use to recognize that your brain

=== Page 67 ===
LEARN TO LOOK 49
is beginning to disengage and you're at risk of moving away from
healthy dialogue?
learn to look for Safety Problems
If you can catch signs that the conversation is starting to tum cru­
cial-before you get sucked so far into the actual argument that
you can never withdraw from the content-then you can start
dual-processing immediately. And what exactly should you watch
for? People who are gifted at dialogue keep a constant vigil on
safety. They pay attention to the content-that's a given-and
they watch for signs that people are afraid. When friends, loved
ones, or colleagues move away from healthy dialogue (freely
adding to the pool of meaning)-either forcing their opinions
into the pool or purposefully keeping their ideas out of the pool­
they immediately tum their attention to whether or not others feel
safe.
When it's safe, you can say anything. Here's why gifted com­
municators keep a close eye on safety. Dialogue calls for the free
flow of meaning-period. And nothing kills the flow of meaning
like fear. When you fear that people aren't buying into your
ideas, you start pushing too hard. When you fear that you may
be harmed in some way, you start withdrawing and hiding. Both
these reactions-to fight and to take flight-are motivated by
the same emotion: fear. On the other hand, if you make it safe
enough, you can talk about almost anything and people wi1l lis­
ten. If you don't fear that you're being attacked or humiliated,
you yourself can hear almost anything and not become defensive.
Think about your own experience. Can you remember receiv­
ing really blistering feedback from someone at some point in your
life, but in this instance you didn't become defensive? Instead,
you absorbed the feedback. You reflected on it. You allowed it to
influence you. If so, ask yourself why. Why in this instance were

=== Page 68 ===
50 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
you able to absorb potentially threatening feedback so well? If
you're like the rest of us, it's because you believed that the other
person had your best interest in mind. In addition, you respected
the other person's opinion. You felt safe receiving the feedback
because you trusted the motives and ability of the other person.
You didn't need to defend yourself from what was being said.
On the other hand, if you don't feel safe, you can't take any
feedback. It's as if the pool of meaning has a lid on it. "What do
you mean I look good? Is that some kind of joke? Are you rib­
bing me?" When you don't feel safe, even well-intended com­
ments are suspect.
When it's unsafe, you start to go blind. By carefully watching
for safety violations, not only can you see when dialogue is in
danger, but you can also reengage your brain. As we've said
before, when your emotions start cranking up, key brain func­
tions start shutting down. Not only do you prepare to take flight,
but your peripheral vision actually narrows. In fact, when you
feel genuinely threatened, you can scarcely see beyond what's
right in front of you. Similarly, when you feel the outcome of a
conversation is being threatened, you have a hard time seeing
beyond the point you're trying to make. By pulling yourself out
of the content of an argument and watching for fear, you reen­
gage your brain and your full vision returns.
Don't let safety problems lead you astray. Let's add a note of
caution. When others begin to feel unsafe, they start doing nasty
things. Now, since they're feeling unsafe, you should be thinking
to yourself: "Hey, they're feeling unsafe. I need to do some­
thing-maybe make it safer." That's what you should be think­
ing. Unfortunately, since others feel unsafe, they may be trying to
make fun of you, insult you, or bowl you over with their argu­
ments. This kind of aggressive behavior doesn't exactly bring out
the diplomat in you. So instead of taking their attack as a sign
that safety is at risk, you take it at its face-as an attack. "I'm

=== Page 69 ===
LEARN TO LOOK 51
under attack!" you think. Then you respond in kind. Or maybe
you try to escape. Either way you're not dual-processing and
then pulling out a skill to restore safety. Instead, you're becom­
ing part of the problem as you get pulled into the fight.
Imagine the magnitude of what we're suggesting here. We're
asking you to recode silence and violence as signs that people are
feeling unsafe. We're asking you to fight your natural tendency
to respond in kind. We're asking you to undo years of practice,
maybe even eons of genetic shaping that prod you to take flight
or pick a fight (when under attack), and recode the stimulus.
"Ah, that's a sign that the other person feels unsafe." And then
what? Do something to make it safe. In the next chapter we'll
explore how. For now, simply learn to look for safety and then be
curious, not angry or frightened.
Silence and Violence
As people begin to feel unsafe, they start down one of two
unhealthy paths. They move either to silence (withholding mean­
ing from the pool) or to violence (trying to force meaning in the
pool). That part we know. But let's add a little more detail. Just
as a little knowledge of what to look for can tum blurry water
into a brown trout, knowing a few of the common forms of
silence and violence helps you see safety problems when they
first start to happen. That way you can step out, restore safety,
and return to dialogue-before the damage is too great.
Silence
Silence consists of any act to purposefully withhold information
from the pool of meaning. It's almost always done as a means of
avoiding potential problems, and it always restricts the flow of
meaning. Methods range from playing verbal games to avoiding
u person entirely. The three most common forms of silence are
masking. avoiding, and withdrawing.

=== Page 70 ===
52 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
• Masking consists of understating or selectively showing our
true opinions. Sarcasm, sugarcoating, and couching are some
of the more popular forms.
"J think your idea is, uh, brilliant. Yeah, that's it. J just worry
that others won't catch the subtle nuances. Some ideas come
before their time, so expect some, uh, minor resistance. "
Meaning: Your idea is insane, and people will fight it with their
last breath.
"Oh yeah, that'll work like a charm. Offer people a discount,
and they'll drive all the way across town just to save six cents
on a box of soap. Where do you come up with this stuff?"
Meaning: What a dumb idea.
• Avoiding involves steering completely away from senSItIve
subjects. We talk, but without addressing the real issues.
"How does your new suit look? Well, you know that blue's my
favorite color. "
Meaning: What happened? Did you buy your clothes at the
circus?
"Speaking of ideas for cost cutting-did you see Friends last
night? Joey inherited a bunch of money and was buying stu­
pid stuff. It was a hoot. "
Meaning: Let's not talk about how to cut costs. It always leads
to a fight.
• Withdrawing means pulling out of a conversation altogether.
We either exit the conversation or exit the room.
"Excuse me. I've got to take this call."
Meaning: I'd rather gnaw off my own arm than spend one
more minute in this useless meeting.

=== Page 71 ===
LEARN TO LOOK 53
"Sorry, I'm not going to talk about how to split up the phone
bill again. I'm not sure our friendship can stand another bat­
tle. " (Exits.)
Meaning: We can't talk about even the simplest of topics with­
out arguing.
Violence
Violence consists of any verbal strategy that attempts to convince,
control, or compel others to your point of view. It violates safety
by trying to force meaning into the pool. Methods range from
name-calling and monologuing to making threats. The three most
common forms are controlling, labeling, and attacking.
• Controlling consists of coercing others to your way of thinking.
It's done through either forcing your views on others or domi­
nating the conversation. Methods include cutting others off,
overstating your facts, speaking in absolutes, changing sub­
jects, or using directive questions to control the conversation.
'There's not a person in the world who hasn't bought one of
these things. They're the perfect gift. "
Meaning: I can't justify spending our hard-earned savings on
this expensive toy, but I really want it.
"We tried their product, but it was an absolute disaster. Every­
one knows that they can't deliver on time and that they offer the
worst customer service on the planet. "
Meaning: I'm not certain of the real facts so I'll use hyperbole
to get your attention.
• Labeling is putting a label on people or ideas so we can dis­
miss them under a general stereotype or category.
.. Your ideas are practically Neanderthal. Any thinking person
would follow my plan. "

=== Page 72 ===
54 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
Meaning: I can't argue my case on its merits.
"You're not going to listen to them are you? For crying out loud!
First, they're from headquarters. Second, they're engineers. Need
I say more?"
Meaning: If I pretend that all people from headquarters and all
engineers are somehow bad and wrong, I won't have to explairl
anything .
• Attacking speaks for itself. You've moved from winning the
argument to making the person suffer. Tactics include belittling
and threatening.
"Try that stupid little stunt and see what happens. "
Meaning: I will get my way on this even if I have to bad-mouth
you and threaten some vague punishment.
"Don't listen to a word Jim is saying. I'm sorry Jim, but I'm
on
to you. You're just trying to make it better for your team while
making the rest of us suffer. I've seen you do it before. You're
a real jerk, you know that? I'm sorry, but someone has to have
the guts to tell it like it is. "
Meaning: To get my way I'll say bad things about you and then
pretend that I'm the only one with any integrity.
look for Your Style Under Stress
Let's say you've been watching for both content and conditions!
You're paying special attention to when a conversation turns cru­
cial. To catch this important moment, you're looking for signs
that safety is at risk. As safety is violated, you even know to
watch for various forms of silence and violence. So are you now
fully armed? Have you seen all there is to see?
Actually, no. Perhaps the most difficult element to watch
closely as you're madly dual-processing is your own behavior.

=== Page 73 ===
LEARN TO LOOK 55
Frankly, most people have trouble pulling themselves away from
the tractor beam of the argument at hand. Then you've got the
problem other people present as they employ all kinds of tactics.
You've got to watch them like a hawk. It's little wonder that pay­
ing close attention to your own behavior tends to take a back­
seat. Besides, it's not like you can actually step out of your body
and observe yourself. You're on the wrong side of your eyeballs.
Low selfmonitors. The truth is, we all have trouble monitor­
ing our own behavior at times. We usually lose any semblance of
social sensitivity when we become so consumed with ideas and
causes that we lose track of what we're doing. We try to bully
our way through. We speak when we shouldn't. We do things
that don't work-all in the name of a cause. We eventually
become so unaware that we become a bit like this fellow of Jack
Handy's invention.
«People were always talking about how mean this guy was
who lived on our block. But I decided to go see for myself.
I went to his door, but he said he wasn't the mean guy, the
mean guy lived in that house over there. 'No, you stupid
idiot,' I said, 'that's my house. '"
Unfortunately, when you fail to monitor your own behavior,
you can look pretty silly. For example, you're talking to your
spouse about the fact that he or she left you sitting at the auto
repair shop for over an hour. After pointing out that it was a sim­
ple misunderstanding, your spouse exclaims: "You don't have to
get angry."
Then you utter those famous words: "I'm not angry!"
Of course, you're spraying spit as you shout out your denial,
and the vein on your forehead has swelled to the size of a teenage
python. You, quite naturally, don't see the inconsistency in your
response. You're in the middle of the whole thing, and you don't
upprcciatc it onc bit whcn your spouse laughs at you.

=== Page 74 ===
56 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
You also play this denial game when you ingenuously answer
the question, "What's wrong?"
"Nothing's wrong," you whimper. Then you shuffle your feet,
stare at the floor, and look wounded.
Become a Vigilant Self-Monitor
What does it take to be able to step out of an argument and
watch for process-including what you yourself are doing and
the impact you're having? You have to become a vigilant self­
monitor. That is, pay close attention to what you're doing and
the impact it's having, and then alter your strategy if necessary.
Specifically, watch to see if you're having a good or bad impact
on safety.
Your Style Under Stress Test
What kind of a self-monitor are you? One good way to increase
your self-awareness is to explore your Style Under Stress. What
do you do when talking turns tough? To find out, fill out the sur­
vey on the following pages. Or, for easier scoring, visit ww.wcru­
cia1conversations.comlsus. It'll help you see what tactics you
typically revert to when caught in the midst of a crucial conver­
sation. It'll also help you determine which parts of this book can
be most helpful to you.
Instructions. The following questions explore how you typi­
cally respond when you're in the middle of a crucial conversa­
tion. Before answering, pick a specific relationship at work or at
home. Then answer the items while thinking about how you typ­
ically approach risky conversations in that relationship.
T F 1. At times I avoid situations that might bring me into
contact with people I'm having problems with.

=== Page 75 ===
LEARN TO LOOK 57
T F 2. I have put off returning phone calls or emails
because I simply didn't want to deal with the person
who sent them.
T F 3. Sometimes when people bring up a touchy or awk-
ward issue, I try to change the subject.
T F 4. When it comes to dealing with awkward or stress-
ful subjects, sometimes I hold back rather than
give my full and candid opinion.
T F 5. Rather than tell people exactly what I think, some-
times I rely on jokes, sarcasm, or snide remarks to
let them know I'm frustrated.
T F 6. When I've got something tough to bring up, some-
times I offer weak or insincere compliments to soft-
en the blow.
T F 7. In order to get my point across, I sometimes exag-
gerate my side of the argument.
T F 8. If I seem to be losing control of a conversation, I
might cut people off or change the subject in order
to bring it back to where I think it should be.
T F 9. When others make points that seem stupid to me,
I sometimes let them know it without holding back
at all.
T F 10. When I'm stunned by a comment, sometimes I say
things that others might take as forceful or attack-
ing-comments such as "Give me a break!" or
"That's ridiculous!"
T F 11. Sometimes when things get heated, I move from
arguing against others' points to saying things that
might hurt them personally.

=== Page 76 ===
58 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
T F 12. If I get into a heated discussion, I've been known
to be tough on the other person. In fact, the person
might feel a bit insulted or hurt.
T F 13. When I'm discussing an important topic with others,
sometimes I move from trying to make my point to
trying to win the battle.
T F 14. In the middle of a tough conversation, I often get
so caught up in arguments that I don't see how I'm
coming across to others.
T F 15. When talking gets tough and I do something hurt-
ful, I'm quick to apologize for mistakes.
T F 16. When I think about a conversation that took a bad
tum, I tend to focus first on what I did that was
wrong rather than focus on others' mistakes.
T F 17. When I've got something to say that others might
not want to hear, I avoid starting out with tough
conclusions, and instead start with facts that help
them understand where I'm coming from.
T F 18. I can tell very quickly when others are holding
back or feeling defensive in a conversation.
T F 19. Sometimes I decide that it's better not to give harsh
feedback because I know that it's bound to cause
real problems.
T F 20. When conversations aren't working, I step back
from the fray, think about what's happening, and
take steps to make it better.
T F 21. When others get defensive because they misunder-
stand me, I quickly get us back on track by clarify-
ing what I do and don't mean.

=== Page 77 ===
LEARN TO LOOK 59
T F 22. There are some people I'm rough on because, to be
honest, they need or deserve what I give them.
T F 23. I sometimes make absolute statements like "The
fact is . . ." or "It's obvious that . . ." to be sure I
get my point across.
T F 24. If others hesitate to share their views, I sincerely
invite them to say what's on their mind, no matter
what it is.
T F 25. At times I argue hard for my view-hoping to keep
others from bringing up opinions that would be a
waste of energy to discuss.
T F 26. Even when things get tense, I adapt quickly to
how others are responding to me and try a new
strategy.
T F 27. When I find that I'm at cross-purposes with some-
one, I often keep trying to win my way rather than
looking for common ground.
T F 28. When things don't go well, I'm more inclined to
see the mistakes others made than notice my own
role.
T F 29. After I share strong opinions, I go out of my way
to invite others to share their views, particularly
opposing ones.
T F 30. When others hesitate to share their views, I do
whatever I can to make it safe for them to speak
honestly.
T F 31. Sometimes I have to discuss things I thought had
been settled because I don't keep track of what was
discussed before.

=== Page 78 ===
60 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
T F 32. I find myself in situations where people get their
feelings hurt because they thought they would have
more of a say in final decisions than they end up
having.
T F 33. I get frustrated sometimes at how long it takes
some groups to make decisions because too many
people are involved.
Style Under Stress Score
Please fill out the score sheets in Figures 4-1 and 4-2. Each
domain contains two to three questions. Next to the question
number is either a (T) or an (F). For example, under "Masking,"
question 5 on Figure 4-1, you'll find a (T). This means that if you
answered it true, check the box. With question 13 on Figure 4-2,
on the other hand, you'll find an (F). Only check that box if you
answered the question false-and so on.
Your Style Under Stress score (Figure 4-1) will show you
which forms of silence or violence you turn to most often. Your
Dialogue Skills score (Figure 4-2) is organized by concept and
chapter so you can decide which chapters may benefit you the
most.
What Your Score Means
Your silence and violence scores give you a measure of how fre­
quently you fall into these less-than-perfect strategies. It's actu­
ally possible to score high in both. A high score (one or two
checked boxes per domain) means you use this technique fairly
often. It also means you're human. Most people toggle between
holding back and becoming too forceful.
The seven domains in Figure 4-2 reflect your skills in each of
the corresponding seven skill chapters. If you score high (two or

=== Page 79 ===
LEARN TO LOOK 61
Silence D Violence D
Masking Controlling
o 5 (T) o 7 (T)
o 6 (T) o 8 (T)
Avoiding Labeling
o 3 (T) o 9 (T)
o 4 (T) o 10 (T)
Withdrawing Attacking
o 1 (T) o 11 (T)
o 2 (T) o 12 (T)
Figure 4-1. Score Sheet for Style Under Stress Assessment
three boxes) in one of these domains, you're already quite skilled
in this area. If you score low (zero or one), you may want to pay
special attention to these chapters.
Since these scores represent how you typically behave during
stressful or crucial conversations, they can change. Your score
doesn't represent an inalterable character trait or a genetic
propensity. It's merely a measure of your behavior-and you can
change that. In fact, people who take this book seriously will
practice the skills contained in each chapter and eventually they
will change. And when they do, so will their lives.
What next? Now that you've identified your own Style Under
Stress. you have a tool that can help you Learn to Look. That is,
as you enter a touchy conversation, you can make a special effort

=== Page 80 ===
62 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
Ch 3: Start with Heart Ch 7: STATE My Path
D D
o 13 (F) o 17 (T)
o 19 (F) o 23 (F)
o 25 (F) o 29 (T)
Ch 4: Learn to Look Ch 8: Explore Others'
o 14 (F) D Paths D
o 18 (T)
o 20 (T)
o 24 (T)
o 26 (T)
o 30 (T)
Ch 5: Make It Safe Ch 9: Move to Action
D D
o 15 (T) o 31 (F)
o 21 (T) o 32 (F)
o 27 (F) o 33 (F)
Ch 6: Master My
Stories D
o 16 (T)
o 22 (F)
o 28 (F)
Figure 4-2. Score Sheet for Dialogue Skills Assessment
to avoid some of your silence or violence habits. Also, when
you're in the middle of a crucial conversation, you can be more
conscious of what to watch for.
SUMMARY-LEARN TO LOOK
When caught up in a crucial conversation, it's difficult to see
exactly what's going on and why. When a discussion starts to
become stressful, we often end up doing the exact opposite of
what works. We tum to the less healthy components of our Style
Under Stress.

=== Page 81 ===
LEARN TO LOOK 63
learn to look
To break from this insidious cycle, Learn to Look.
• Learn to look at content and conditions.
• Look for when things become crucial.
• Learn to watch for safety problems.
• Look to see if others are moving toward silence or violence.
• Look for outbreaks of your Style Under Stress.

=== Page 83 ===
5
They had ltved together {or so many years that
they mistook their arguments for conversation.
-MARJOlUli KEllOGG
Make I t Safe
How to Make It Safe to Talk
about Almost Anything
The last chapter contained a promise: If you spot safety risks as
they happen, you can step out of the conversation, build safety,
and then find a way to dialogue about almost anything. In this
chapter we'll fulfill that promise by teaching what it takes to
restore safety.
To get started, let's examine a situation where safety is at risk.
We'll eavesdrop on a couple as they try to discuss one of the
most delicate of topics-physical intimacy.
First a little background. Jotham thinks he and Yvonne are inti­
mate with each other far too seldom. Yvonne is satisfied with their
physical relationship. For years the two have acted out rather than
talked out their concerns. When Jotham wants to be amorous and

=== Page 84 ===
66 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
Yvonne doesn't respond, he goes to silence. He pouts, says almost
nothing, and avoids Yvonne for the next few days.
Yvonne knows what's going on with Jotham. Occasionally
she'll go along with him even when she's not feeling particularly
romantic. She does this in hopes of avoiding Jotham's pouting.
Unfortunately, she then feels resentful toward Jotham, and it's
much longer before she feels genuinely romantic toward him.
So here's the game. The more Jotham insists and pouts, the less
attractive and interesting he is to Yvonne. The more Yvonne suc­
cumbs and then resents, the less she's interested in the entire rela­
tionship. The more both of them act out rather than talk out this
crucial conversation, the more likely they are to end up going
their separate ways. Yvonne has decided to broach the subject
with Jotham. Rather than waiting until they're both upset, she's
picked a time when they're relaxing on the couch. Here goes.
YVONNE: Jotham, can we talk about what happened last
night-you know, when I told you that I was tired?
JOTHAM: I don't know if I'm in the mood.
YVONNE: What's that supposed to mean?
JOTHAM: I'm sick and tired of you deciding when we do
what!
YVONNE: (walks out)
STEP OUT. MAKE IT SAFE. THEN STEP BACK IN
Okay, let's look at Yvonne. She tried to tackle a tough topic.
Good for her. She was already uncomfortable and her partner
took a cheap shot at her. Some help he was. Now what should
she do? How can she get back to honest and healthy dialogue?
What do you do when you don't feel like it's safe to share what's
on your mind?

=== Page 85 ===
MAKE IT SAFE 67
The key is to step out of the content of the conversation. Don't
stay stuck in what's being said. Yvonne exited because she was
focused on what Jotham was saying. If she had been looking at
Jotham's behavior, she would have spotted his use of sarcasm­
a form of masking. Rather than talking out his concern, he's tak­
ing a potshot. Why would he do that? Because he doesn't feel
safe using dialogue. But Yvonne missed this point.
Now, we're not suggesting that Jotham's behavior is acceptable,
or that Yvonne should put up with it. But first things first-Start
with Heart. The first question is: "What do I really want?"
If you really want to have a healthy conversation about a topic
that will make or break your relationship, then for a moment or
two you may have to set aside confronting the current issue­
i.e., Jotham's sarcasm.
Yvonne's challenge here is to build safety-enough so that she
can talk about their physical relationship, about the way Jotham
is dealing with it, or about any other concerns. But if she doesn't
make it safe, all she's going to get is a continuation of the silence
and violence games.
So, what should she do?
In these circumstances, the worst at dialogue do what both
Jotham and Yvonne did. Like Jotham, they totally ignore the cry­
ing need for more safety. They say whatever is on their minds­
with no regard for how it will be received. Or like Yvonne, they
conclude the topic is completely unsafe and move to silence.
The good realize that safety is at risk, but they fix it in exactly
the wrong way. They try to make the subject more palatable by
sugarcoating their message. "Oh, honey, I really want to be with
you but I'm under a lot of pressure at work, and the stress makes
it hard for me to enjoy our time together." They try to make
things safer by watering down their content. This strategy, of
l:ourse, avoids the real problem, and it never gets fixed.

=== Page 86 ===
68 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
The best don't play games. They know that dialogue is the free
flow of meaning-with no pretending, sugarcoating, or faking.
So they do something completely different. They step out of the
content of the conversation, make it safe, and then step back in.
Once you've spotted safety problems, you can talk about the
most challenging of topics by stepping out of the content and
building enough safety that almost anything becomes discussable.
For example: "Can we change gears for a minute? I'd like to talk
about what happens when we're not romantically in sync. It would
be good if we could both share what's working and what isn't. My
goal isn't to make you feel guilty, and I certainly don't want to
become defensive. What I'd really love is for us to come up with a
solution that makes us both satisfied in our relationship."
NOTICE WHICH CONDITION IS AT RISK
Now, let's look at a couple of pieces that help us establish safety­
even when the topic is high risk, controversial, and emotional. The
first step to building more safety is to understand which of the two
conditions of safety is at risk. Each requires a different solution.
Mutual Purpose
Why Talk in the First Place?
Remember the last time someone gave you difficult feedback and
you didn't become defensive? Say a friend said some things to
you that most people might get upset over. In order for this per­
son to be able to deliver the delicate message, you must have
believed he or she cared about you, or about your goals and
objectives. That means you trusted his or her purposes so you
were willing to listen to some pretty tough feedback.
Crucial conversations often go awry not because of the con­
tent of the conversation, but because others believe that the

=== Page 87 ===
MAKE IT SAFE 69
painful and pointed content means that you have a malicious
intent. How can they feel safe when they believe you're out to do
them harm? Soon, every word out of your mouth is suspect.
Consequently, the first condition of safety is Mutual Purpose.
Mutual Purpose means that others perceive that we are working
toward a common outcome in the conversation, that we care
about their goals, interests, and values. And vice versa. We
believe they care about ours. Consequently, Mutual Purpose is
the entry condition of dialogue. Find a shared goal and you have
both a good reason and a healthy climate for talking.
For example, if Jotham believes that Yvonne's purpose in rais­
ing this topic is to make him feel guilty or to get her way, this
conversation is doomed from the outset. If he believes she really
cares about making things better for him and herself, she may
have a chance.
Watch for signs that Mutual Purpose is at risk. How do we
know when the safety problem we're seeing is due to a lack of
Mutual Purpose? It's actually fairly easy to spot. First and fore­
most, when purpose is at risk, we end up in debate. When others
start forcing their opinions into the pool of meaning, it's often
because they figure that we're trying to win and they need to do
the same. Other signs that purpose is at risk include defensiveness,
hidden agendas (the silence form of fouled-up purpose), accusa­
tions, and circling back to the same topic. Here are some crucial
questions to help us determine when Mutual Purpose is at risk:
• Do others believe I care about their goals in this conversation?
• Do they trust my motives?
Remember the Mutual in Mutual Purpose. Just a word to the
wise. Mutual Purpose is not a technique. To succeed in crucial
conversations, we must really care about the interests of others­
not just our own. The purpose has to be truly mutual. If our goal

=== Page 88 ===
70 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
is to get our way or manipulate others, it will quickly become
apparent, safety will be destroyed, and we'll be back to silence
and violence in no time. Before you begin, examine your motives.
Ask yourself the Start with Heart questions:
• What do I want for me?
• What do I want for others?
• What do I want for the relationship?
Look for the mutuality. Let's see how Mutual Purpose applies
to a tough example-one where, at first glance, it might appear
as if your purpose is to make things better for yourself. How can
you find Mutual Purpose in this? Let's say you've got a boss who
frequently fails to keep commitments. How could you tell the
boss you don't trust him? Surely there's no way to say this with­
out the boss becoming defensive or vengeful, because he knows
that your goal is merely to make your life better.
To avoid disaster, find a Mutual Purpose that would be so
motivating to the boss that he'd want to hear your concerns. If
your only reason for approaching the boss is to get what you
want, the boss will hear you as critical and selfish-which is what
you are. On the other hand, if you try to see the other person's
point of view, you can often find a way to draw the other person
willingly into even very sensitive conversations. For example, if
the boss's behavior is causing you to miss deadlines he cares
about, or incur costs he frets over, or lose productivity that he
worries about, then you're onto a possible Mutual Purpose.
Imagine raising the topic this way: "I've got some ideas for
how I can be much more reliable and even reduce costs by a few
thousand dollars in preparing the report each month. It's going
to be a bit of a sensitive conversation-but I think it will help a
great deal if we can talk about it."

=== Page 89 ===
MAKE IT SAFE 71
Mutual Respect
Will We Be Able to Remain in Dialogue?
While it's true that there's no reason to enter a crucial conversaM
tion if you don't have Mutual Purpose, it's equally true that you
can't stay in the conversation if you don't maintain Mutual
Respect. Mutual Respect is the continuance condition of dia­
logue. As people perceive that others don't respect them, the
conversation immediately becomes unsafe and dialogue comes to
a screeching halt.
Why? Because respect is like air. If you take it away, it's all
people can think about. The instant people perceive disrespect
in a conversation, the interaction is no longer about the origi·
nal purpose-it is now about defending dignity.
For example, you're talking with a group of supervisors
about a complicated quality problem. You really want to see
the problem resolved once and for all. Your job depends on it.
Unfortunately, you also think the supervisors are overpaid and
underqualified. You firmly believe that not only are they in
over their heads, but they do stupid things all the time. Some
of them even act unethically.
As the supervisors throw out ideas, you roll your eyes. The dis ..
respect you carry in your head creeps out in one unfortunate ges·
ture. And it's all over. What happens to the conversation despite
the fact that you still share a common objective? It tanks. They
take shots at your proposals. You add insulting adjectives in
describing theirs. As attention turns to scoring points, everyone
loses. Your Mutual Purpose suffers for a lack of Mutual Respect.
Telltale signs. To spot when respect is violated and safety takes
a turn south, watch for signs that people are defending their dig­
nity. Emotions are the key. When people feel disrespected, they
become highly charged. Their emotions tum from fear to anger.

=== Page 90 ===
72 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
Then they resort to pouting, name-calling, yelling, and making
threats. Ask the following question to determine when Mutual
Respect is at risk:
• Do others believe I respect them?
Can You Respect People You Don't Respect?
Some people fear they'll never be able to maintain Mutual
Purpose or Mutual Respect with certain individuals or in certain
circumstances. How, they wonder, can they share the same pur­
pose with people who come from completely different back­
grounds or whose morals or values differ from theirs? What do
you do, for example, if you're upset because another person has
let you down? And if this has repeatedly happened, how can you
respect a person who is so poorly motivated and selfish?
Yvonne is struggling with this exact point. There are times
when she doesn't even like Jotham. She sees him as whiny and self­
centered. How can you speak respectfully with someone like that?
Dialogue truly would be doomed if we had to share every
objective or respect every element of another person's character
before we could talk. If this were the case, we'd all be mute. We
can, however, stay in dialogue by finding a way to honor and
regard another person's basic humanity. In essence, feelings of
disrespect often come when we dwell on how others are differ­
ent from ourselves. We can counteract these feelings by looking
for ways we are similar. Without excusing their behavior, we try
to sympathize, even empathize, with them.
A rather clever person once hinted how to do this in the form
of a prayer-"Lord, help me forgive those who sin differently
than I." When we recognize that we all have weaknesses, it's eas­
ier to find a way to respect others. When we do this, we feel a
kinship, a sense of mutuality between ourselves and even the
thorniest of people. It is this sense of kinship and connection to

=== Page 91 ===
MAKE IT SAFE 73
others that motivates us to enter tough conversations, and it
eventually enables us to stay in dialogue with virtually anyone.
Consider the following example. A manufacturing company has
been out on strike for over six months. Finally, the union agrees to
return to work, but the represented employees have to sign a con­
tract that is actually worse than what they were originally demand­
ing. The first day back it's clear that although people will work,
they won't do so with a smile and a spring in their step. Everyone
is furious. How are people ever going to move ahead?
Concerned that although the strike is over, the battle isn't, a
manager asks one of the authors to lend a hand. So he meets with
the two groups of leaders (both managers and union heads) and
asks them to do one thing. Each group is to go into a separate
room and write out its goals for the company on flip-chart-sized
paper. For two hours each group feverishly lays out what it wants
in the future and then tapes the lists to the wall. When they fin­
ish their assignment, the groups then swap places with the goal of
finding anything-maybe just a morsel-but anything they might
have in common.
After a few minutes the two groups return to the training
room. They're positively stunned. It was as if they had written
the exact same lists. They didn't merely share the shadow of an
idea or two. Their aspirations were nearly identical. All wanted
a profitable company, stable and rewarding jobs, high-quality
products, and a positive impact on the community. Given a
chance to speak freely and without fear of attack, each group
laid out not simply what it wanted, but what virtually every per­
son wanted.
This experience caused each group to seriously question how
it had seen the other side. The groups began to see others as
morc similar to themselves. They realized the petty and political
tactics thc others had used were embarrassingly similar to the

=== Page 92 ===
74 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
ones they themselves had employed. The "sins" of others were
different from their own more because of the role they played
than because of a fundamental blight on their character. They
restored Mutual Respect, and dialogue replaced silence and vio­
lence for the first time in decades.
WHAT TO DO ONCE YOU STEP OUT
When you see that either Mutual Respect or Purpose is at risk,
we've suggested that you shouldn't ignore it. We've also argued
that you should be able to find a way to both find Mutual
Purpose and enjoy Mutual Respect-even with people who are
enormously different.
But how? What are you supposed to actually do? We've
shared a few modest ideas (mostly things to avoid), so let's get
into three hard-hitting skills that the best at dialogue use:
• Apologize
• Contrast
• CRIB
Each skill helps rebuild either Mutual Respect or Mutual
Purpose. First, we'll study them in action. Then, we'll see if they
might help Yvonne get things back on track.
Where were you? You're talking with a group of hourly em­
ployees who worked all night preparing for a factory tour. You
were supposed to bring the division vice president by, and the
team members were then going to update him on a new process
they've put into place. They're proud of some improvements
they've recently made-enough so that they willingly worked
straight through the night to finish the last details.
Unfortunately, when it came time to swing by their area, the
visiting VP dropped a bomb. He laid out a plan you're convinced

=== Page 93 ===
MAKE IT SAFE 75
would hurt quality and potentially drive away your biggest cus­
tomers. Since you only had another hour with the VP, you chose
to talk through the issue rather than conduct the tour. Your
future depended on that particular conversation. Fortunately,
you were able to avert the plan. Unfortunately, you forgot to get
word to the team that had worked so hard.
As you walked back to your office after escorting the execu­
tive to his car, you bumped into the team. Bleary-eyed and disap­
pointed, all six of them were now fuming. No visit, no phone
call, and now it was clear from the way you were sprinting on by
that you weren't even going to stop and give them a simple expla­
nation.
Ouch.
That's when things started turning ugly. "We pulled an all­
nighter, and you didn't even bother to come by! That's the last
time we're busting our hump for you!"
Time stands still. This conversation has just turned crucial.
The employees who had worked so hard are obviously upset.
They feel disrespected.
But you miss that point. Why? Because now you feel disre­
spected. They've attacked you. So you stay stuck in the content
of the conversation-thinking this has something to do with the
factory tour.
"I had to choose between the future of the company and the
plant tour. 1 chose our future, and I'd do it again if 1 had to."
Now both you and they are fighting for respect. This is getting
you nowhere fast. But what else could you do?
Instead of getting hooked and fighting back, break the cycle.
Sec their aggressive behavior for what it is-a sign of violated
sarety-then step out of the conversation, build safety, and step
back into the content. Here's how.

=== Page 94 ===
76 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
Apologize When Appropriate
When you've made a mistake that has hurt others (e.g., you didn't
call the team), start with an apology. An apology is a statement
that sincerely expresses your sorrow for your role in causing-or
at least not preventing-pain or difficulty to others.
''I'm sorry I didn't give you a call when I learned that we
wouldn't be coming by. You worked all night, it would have
been a wonderful chance to showcase your improvements,
and I didn't even explain what happened. I apologize."
Now, an apology isn't really an apology unless you experience a
change in heart. To offer a sincere apology, your motives have to
change. You have to give up saving face, being right, or winning
in order to focus on what you really want. You have to sacrifice a
bit of your ego by admitting your error. But like many sacrifices,
when you give up something you value, you're rewarded with
something even more valuable-healthy dialogue and better
results. Then watch to see if this sincere show of respect has
helped restore safety. If it has, you can now explain the details of
what happened. If it hasn't, you'll need to use one of the more
advanced skills that follow in the next few pages. In any case, first
make it safe; then return to the issue.
When your behavior has given someone clear cause to doubt
your respect or commitment to Mutual Purpose, your conversa­
tion will end up in silly game-playing and frustrating misunder­
standings until you offer a sincere apology.
Contrast to Fix Misunderstanding
Sometimes others feel disrespected during crucial conversations
even though we haven't done anything disrespectful. Sure, there
are times when respect gets violated because we behave in clearly
hurtful ways. But just as often, the insult is entirely unintended.

=== Page 95 ===
MAKE IT SAFE 77
The same can happen with Mutual Purpose. You can start by
innocently sharing your views, but the other person believes your
intention is to beat him or her up or coerce him or her into accept­
ing your opinion. Clearly an apology is not appropriate in these cir­
cumstances. It would be disingenuous to admit you were wrong
when you weren't. How, then, can you rebuild Mutual Purpose or
Mutual Respect in order to make it safe to get back to dialogue?
When others misinterpret either your purpose or your intent,
step out of the argument and rebuild safety by using a skill called
Contrasting.
Contrasting is a don'tldo statement that:
• Addresses others' concerns that you don't respect them or that
you have a malicious purpose (the don't part).
• Confirms your respect or clarifies your real purpose (the do
part).
For example:
[The don't part] "The last thing I wanted to do was com­
municate that I don't value the work you put in or that I
didn't want to share it with the VP.
[The do part] I think your work has been nothing short of
spectacular. "
Now that you've addressed the threat to safety, you can return
to the issue of the visit itself and move to remediation:
"Unfortunately, just when I was starting to make the trip out
here, an issue came up with the VP that I needed to address
right then and there, or it could have cost us a huge piece of
our business. I tell you what-I'll see if I can get him down
here sometime tomorrow to review your work. He'll be here
for the ribbon-cutting ceremony. Let's see if we can show off
the process impl'Ovcments you came up with."

=== Page 96 ===
78 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
Of the two parts of Contrasting, the don't is the more
important because it deals with the misunderstanding that has
put safety at risk. The employees who worked so hard are act­
ing on the belief that you don't appreciate thejr efforts and
didn't care enough to keep them informed-when the opposite
was true. So you address the misunderstanding by explaining
what you don't intend. Once you've done this, and safety
returns to the conversation, then you can explain what you do
intend. Safety first.
Let's go back to Yvonne and Jotham. Yvonne is trying to get
the conversation going, and Jotham suspects her motives. Let's
see how Contrasting might help her.
YVONNE: I think it makes things worse when you withdraw
and won't talk to me for days at a time.
JOTHAM: SO you expect me not only to put up with regular
rejection, but also to be sociable and happy when I do?
Jotham appears to believe that Yvonne's motive is to reshape him.
It's unsafe. Mutual Purpose is at risk. Rather than responding to
his sarcasm, she should step out of the content and clarify her real
motives.
YVONNE: I don't want to suggest that this problem is yours.
The truth is, I think it's ours. I'm not trying to put the
burden on you. I don't even know what the solution is.
What I do want is to be able to talk so that we can under­
stand each other better. Perhaps that will help me change
how I'm responding to you, too.
laTHAM: I know where this is going. We talk, I continue to
get rejected, but you get to feel good about yourself
because "we've communicated." Have you been watching
Oprah again?

=== Page 97 ===
MAKE IT SAFE 79
Obviously Jotham still believes that Yvonne merely wants to con­
firm that their existing relationship is okay and if she does, she'll
be able to continue to reject Jotham-but feel good about it.
lotham still feels unsafe. So Yvonne continues to step out and
build safety, using Contrasting.
YVONNE: Seriously, Honey. I'm not interested in discussing
why our current relationship is really okay. I can see that
it isn't. I merely want to talk about what each of us likes
and doesn't like. That way we'll be able to see what we
need to improve and why. My only goal is to come up
with some ideas that will make both of us happy.
JOTHAM: (Changing tone and demeanor) Really? I'm sorry
to be so insecure about this. I know I'm being a bit selfish
about things, but I don't know how to make myself feel
differently.
Contrasting is not apologizing. It's important to understand
that Contrasting is not apologizing. It is not a way of taking back
something we've said that hurt others' feelings. Rather, it is a
way of ensuring what we said didn't hurt more than it should
have. Once Yvonne clarified her genuine goals (and not merely
some trumped-up goal that appeals to lotham), lotham felt safer
acknowledging his own contribution, and the two were back in
dialogue.
Contrasting provides context and proportion. When we're in
the middle of a touchy conversation, sometimes others hear what
we're saying as bigger or worse than we intend. For example, you
talk with your assistant about his lack of punctuality. When you
share your concern, he appears crushed.
At this point you could be tempted to water down your con­
lent-"You know it's really not that big a deal." Don't do it.
Don't take back what you've said. Instead, put it in context. For

=== Page 98 ===
80 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
instance, at this point your assistant may believe you are com­
pletely dissatisfied with his performance. He believes that your
view of the issue at hand represents the totality of your respect
for him. If this belief is incorrect, use Contrasting to clarify
what you don't and do believe. Start with what you don't
believe.
"Let me put this in perspective. I don't want you to think
I'm not satisfied with the quality of your work. I want us to
continue working together. I really do think you're doing a
good job. This punctuality issue is important to me, and I'd
just like you to work on that. If you will be more attentive
to that, there are no other issues."
Use Contrasting for prevention or first aid. Contrasting is use­
ful both as a prevention and as first aid for safety problems. So
far our examples have been of the first-aid type. Someone has
taken something wrong, and we've intervened to clarify our true
purpose or meaning.
When we're aware that something we're about to drop into
the pool of meaning could create a splash of defensiveness, we
use Contrasting to bolster safety-even before we see others
going to either silence or violence.
"I don't want you to think that I don't appreciate the time
you've taken to keep our checkbook balanced and up to
date. I do appreciate it, and I know I certainly couldn't have
done nearly as well. I do, however, have some concerns
with how we're using the new electronic banking system."
When people misunderstand and you start arguing over the
misunderstanding, stop. Use Contrasting. Explain what you
don't mean until you've restored safety. Then return to the
conversation. Safety first.

=== Page 99 ===
MAKE IT SAFE 81
You Try
Let's practice. Read the situations below and then come up with
your own Contrasting statements. Remember, contrast what you
don't want or intend with what you actually do want or intend.
Say it in a way that helps make it safe for the other person.
Angry roommate. You asked your roommate to move her
things in the refrigerator off your shelves and onto her shelves.
You thought it was no big deal, simply a request to share the
space evenly. You have no hidden agenda. You like this roommate
a great deal. She came back with: "There you go again, telling me
how to run my life. I can't change the vacuum cleaner bag with­
out you jumping in and giving me advice."
Formulate a Contrasting statement.
I don't want
__________________ _
I do want
___________________ _
Touchy employee. You're about to talk to Jacob, an employee
who continually blows up when people try to give him feedback.
Yesterday a coworker told Jacob that she'd prefer it if he would
clean up after himself in the lunchroom (something that every­
one else does), and Jacob blew up. You've decided to say some­
thing. Of course, you'll be giving him feedback, and that's what
usually sets him off, so you'll need to be careful up front. You'll
want to set the right tone and layout the context carefully. After
all, you like Jacob a lot. Everyone does. He has a great sense of
humor and is the most competent and hard-working employee
around. If he could only be less touchy.
Formulate a Contrasting statement.
I don't want
__________________ _
I do want

=== Page 100 ===
82 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
Chatty teenager. Your teenage nephew moved in with you
when his father (your brother) passed away and your sister-in­
law could no longer handle him. He was starting to hang with
the wrong crowd. He has always gotten along with you, and
things have been going well except in one area: He spends hours
on the phone and Internet-most of his waking hours. In light of
what he could be doing, you're not really disturbed, but it has
been hard for you to make calls and check your email. You said
something to him about cutting back his time on the phone and
online, and he came back with: "Please don't send me to a youth
home! I'll be good! I promise. I'll stop talking to my friends; just
don't send me away."
Formulate a contrasting statement.
I don't want.
___________________ _
I do want
___________________ _
CRIB TO GET TO MUTUAL PURPOSE
Let's add one more skill. Sometimes we find ourselves in the
middle of a debate because we clearly have different purposes.
There is no misunderstanding here. Contrasting won't do the
trick. We need something sturdier for this job.
For instance, you've just been offered a promotion that will
help propel your career along a faster track and bring you a great
deal more authority, and it pays enough to help soften the blow
of displacement. That last part is important because you'll have
to move the family across the country and your spouse and kids
love where you currently live.
You expected your spouse to have feelings of ambivalence
over the move, but he or she doesn't seem to be bivaling even a
tiny bit. To your spouse the promotion is a bad news/bad news
event. First, you have to move, and second, you'll work even

=== Page 101 ===
MAKE IT SAFE 83
longer hours. That whole thing about more money and power
doesn't seem to be compensating. Now what?
The worst at dialogue either ignore the problem and push
ahead or roll over and let others have their way. They opt for
either competition or submission. Both strategies end up making
winners and losers, and the problem continues long beyond the
initial conversation.
The good at dialogue move immediately toward compromise.
For example, the couple facing the transfer sets up two house­
holds-one where one spouse will be working and one where
the family currently lives. Nobody really wants this arrangement,
and frankly, it's a pretty ugly solution that's bound to lead to
more serious problems, even divorce. While compromise is
sometimes necessary, the best know better than to start there.
The best at dialogue use four skills to look for a Mutual Purpose.
The four skills they use form the acronym CRIB .
.commit to Seek Mutual Purpose
As is true with most dialogue skills, if you want to get back to dia­
logue, you have to Start with Heart. In this case, you have to agree
to agree. To be successful, we have to stop using silence or vio­
lence to compel others to our view. We must even surrender false
dialogue, where we pretend to have Mutual Purpose (calmly argu­
ing our side until the other person gives in). We Start with Heart
by committing to stay in the conversation until we come up with
a solution that serves a purpose we both share.
This can be tough. To stop arguing, we have to suspend our
belief that our choice is the absolute best and only one, and that
we'll never be happy until we get exactly what we currently
want. We have to open our mind to the fact that maybe, just
maybe, there is a different choice out there-one that suits
everyone.

=== Page 102 ===
84 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
We also have to be willing to verbalize this commitment even
when our partner seems committed to winning. We act on faith
that our partner is stuck in silence or violence because he or she
feels unsafe. We assume that if we build more safety-by
demonstrating our commitment to finding a Mutual Purpose­
the other person will feel more confident that dialogue could be
a productive avenue.
So next time you find yourself stuck in a battle of wills, try this
amazingly powerful but simple skill. Step out of the content of
the struggle and make it safe. Simply say, "It seems like we're
both trying to force our view. I commit to stay in this discussion
until we have a solution both of us are happy with." Then watch
whether safety takes a turn for the better.
.Recognize the Purpose behind the Strategy
Wanting to come up with a shared goal is a wonderful first step,
but it's not enough. Once we've had a change of heart, we need
to change our strategy. Here's the problem we have to fix: When
we find ourselves at an impasse, it's because we're asking for one
thing and the other person is asking for something else. We think
we'll never find a way out because we equate what we're asking
for with what we want. In truth, what we're asking for is the
strategy we're suggesting to get what we want. We confuse wants
or purpose with strategies. That's the problem.
For example, I come home from work and say that I want to
go to a movie. You say that you want to stay home and relax.
And so we debate: movie, TV, movie, read, etc. We figure we'll
never be able to resolve our differences because going out and
staying home are incompatible.
In such circumstances we can break the impasse by asking
others, "Why do you want that?" In this case,

=== Page 103 ===
MAKE IT SAFE 85
"Why do you want to stay home?"
"Because I'm tired of running around and dealing with the
hassle of the city."
"So you want peace and quiet?"
"Mostly. And why do you want to go to a movie?"
"So I can spend some time with you away from the kids."
Before you can agree on a Mutual Purpose, you must know
what people's real purposes are. So step out of the content of the
conversation-which is generally focused on strategies-and
explore the purposes behind them.
When you do this, new options become possible. When you
release your grip on your strategy and focus on your real pur­
pose, you open up the possibility of finding new alternatives that
can serve Mutual Purpose.
"You want peace and quiet, and I want time with you away
from the kids. So if we can come up with something that is
quiet and away, we'll both be happy. Is that right?"
"Absolutely. What if we were to take a drive up the
canyon and . . ."
Invent a Mutual Purpose
Sometimes when we recognize the purposes behind our strategies,
we discover that we actually have compatible goals. From there
you simply come up with common strategies. But we're not always
so lucky. For example, you find out that your genuine wants and
goals cannot be served except at the expense of the other person's.
In this case you cannot discover a Mutual Purpose, so you must
actively invent one.
To invent a Mutual Purpose, move to more encompassing goals.
Find an objective that is more meaningful or more rewarding than

=== Page 104 ===
86 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
the ones that divide the various sides. For instance, you and your
spouse may not agree on whether or not you should take the pro­
motion, but you can agree that the needs of your relationship
and the children come before career aspirations. By focusing on
higher and longer-term goals, you can find a way to transcend
short-term compromises, build Mutual Purpose, and get to dia­
logue.
Ilrainstorm New Strategies
Once you've built safety by finding a shared purpose, you should
now have enough safety to return to the content of the conver­
sation. It's time to step back into the dialogue and brainstorm
strategies that meet everyone's needs. If you've committed to
finding something everyone can agree on, and surfaced what you
really want, you'll no longer be spending your energy on unpro­
ductive conflict. Instead, you'll be actively coming up with
options that can serve everyone.
Suspend judgment and think outside the box for new alterna­
tives. Can you find a way to work in a job that is local and still
meets your career goals? Is this job with this company the only
thing that will make you happy? Is a move really necessary in
this new job? Is there another community that could offer your
family the same benefits? If you're not willing to give creativity
a try, it'll be impossible for you to jointly come up with a mutu­
ally acceptable option. If you are, the sky's the limit.
CRIB to Get to Mutual Purpose
So when you sense that you and others are working at cross­
purposes, here's what you can do. First, step out of the content
of the conflict. Stop focusing on who thinks what. Then CRIB
your way to Mutual Purpose.

=== Page 105 ===
MAKE IT SAFE 87
• Qommit to seek Mutual Purpose. Make a unilateral public
commitment to stay in the conversation until you come up
with something that serves everyone.
"This isn't working. Your team is arguing to stay late and
work until we're done, and my team wants to go home and
come back on the weekend. Why don't we see if we can come
up with something that satisfies everyone?"
• Recognize the purpose behind the strategy. Ask people why
they want what they're pushing for. Separate what they're
demanding from the purpose it serves.
"Exactly why don't you want to come in Saturday morning?
We're feeling fatigued and are worried about safety issues and
a loss of quality. Why do you want to stay late? "
• Invent a Mutual Purpose. If after clarifying everyone's pur­
poses you are still at odds, see if you can invent a higher or
longer-term purpose that is more motivating than the ones
that keep you in conflict.
"I certainly don't want to make winners and losers here. It's
far better if we can come up with something that doesn't make
one team resent the other one. We've voted before or flipped a
coin, and the losers just ended up resenting the winners. I'm
more worried about how we feel about each other than any­
thing else. Let's make sure that whatever we do, we don't
drive a wedge in our working relationship. "
• B.rainstorm new strategies. With a clear Mutual Purpose, you
can join forces in searching for a solution that serves everyone.
"So we need to come up with something that doesn't jeopard­
ize safety and quality and allows your team to attend their col­
league's wedding on Saturday. My team members don't care
abuut the game a bit. What if we were to work the morning and

=== Page 106 ===
88 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
early afternoon, and then you come in after the game and take
over from there? That way we'll be able . . .
"
BACK TO YVONNE AND JOTHAM
Let's end where we started. Yvonne is going to try to move to
dialogue with Jotham. Let's see how she does at making it safe in
her crucial conversation. First, she'll use Contrasting to prevent
misunderstanding of her purpose.
YVONNE: Jotham, I'd like to talk about our physical relation­
ship. I'm not doing it to put you on the spot or to suggest
the problem is yours. I'm completely clear that it's as
much my problem as yours. I'd really like to talk about
it so we can make things better for both of us.
JOTHAM: What's there to talk about? You don't want it. I
want it. I'll try to deal with it.
YVONNE: I think it's more complicated than that. The way
you act sometimes makes me want to be with you even less.
JOTHAM: If that's how you feel, why are we pretending we
have a relationship at all?
Okay, what just happened? Remember, we're exploring
Yvonne's side of the conversation. She's the one initiating the
talk. Clearly there's a lot Jotham could be doing to make things go
better. But she's not Jotham. What should Yvonne do? She should
focus on what she really wants: to find a way to make things bet­
ter for both of them. Consequently, she shouldn't respond to the
content of Jotham's discouraging statement. Rather, she should
look at the safety issue behind it. Why is Jotham starting to with­
draw from the conversation? Two reasons:
• The way Yvonne made her point sounded to him like she was
blaming him for everything.

=== Page 107 ===
MAKE IT SAFE 89
• He believes her concern in one small area reflects her total
feelings toward him.
So she'll apologize and use Contrasting to rebuild safety.
YVONNE: I'm sorry I said it that way. I'm not blaming you
for how I feel or act. That's my problem. I don't see this
as your problem. I see it as our problem. Both of us may
be acting in ways that make things worse. I know I am at
least.
laTHAM: I probably am too. Sometimes I pout because I'm
hurting. And I also do it hoping it'll make you feel bad.
I'm sorry about that, too.
Notice what just happened. Since Yvonne dealt well with the
safety issue and kept focused on what she really wanted out of
this conversation, Jotham returned to the conversation. This is
far more effective than if Yvonne had gone into blaming.
Let's continue.
JOTHAM: I just don't see how we can work this out. I'm
wired for more passion than you are-it seems like the
only solution is for me to put up with it the way it is or
for you to feel like a sex slave.
The problem now is one of Mutual Purpose. Jotham thinks he
and Yvonne are at cross-purposes. In his mind, there is no pos­
sibility of a mutually satisfactory solution. Rather than move to
compromise or fight for her way, Yvonne will step out of the
issue and CRIB to get to Mutual Purpose.
YVONNE: [Commit to seek Mutual Purpose] No, that isn't
what I want at all. I don't want anything with you that
isn't great for both of us. I just want to find a way to have
us both feel close. appreciated. and loved.

=== Page 108 ===
90 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
laTHAM: That's what I want, too. It just seems like we get
those feelings in different ways.
(Notice how lotham is leaving the game behind and joining
the dialogue. Safety-specifically Mutual Purpose-is making
this possible.)
YVONNE: [Recognize the purpose behind the strategy] Maybe
not. What makes you feel loved and appreciated?
laTHAM: Making love with you when you really want to
makes me feel loved and appreciated. And you?
YVONNE: When you do thoughtful things for me. And, I
guess, when you hold me-but not always sexually.
laTHAM: You mean, if we're just cuddling that makes you
feel loved?
YVONNE: Yes. And sometimes-I guess when I think
you're doing it because you love me-sex does that for
me, too.
JOTHAM: [Invent a Mutual Purpose] So we need to find
ways to be together that make both of us feel loved and
appreciated. Is that what we're looking for here?
YVONNE: Yes. I really want that, too.
laTHAM: [Brainstorm new strategies] Well, what if we . . .
BUT I COULD NEVER DO THAT!
Reading a complicated interaction like this one might lead to two
reactions. First, you might think, "Wow, these ideas could actu­
ally work!" And at the same time, you could be thinking, "But
there's no way I could think that clearly in the middle of that
kind of delicate conversation!"

=== Page 109 ===
MAKE IT SAFE 91
We admit that it's pretty easy for us to put all the skills together
when we're sitting at a computer typing a script. But the good
news is, that's not where these examples came from. They came
from real experiences. People do act like this all the time. In fact,
you do on your best days.
So don't overwhelm yourself by asking whether you could
think this clearly during every heated and emotional conver­
sation. Merely consider whether you could think a little more
clearly during a few crucial conversations. Or prepare in advance.
Before a crucial conversation begins, think about which skills will
help you most. Remember, when it comes to these high-stakes
conversations, a little progress can produce a lot of benefit.
Finally, as is the case with most complicated problems, don't
aim for perfection. Aim for progress. Learn to slow the process
down when your adrenaline gets pumping. Carry a few of the
questions we're suggesting with you as you go. Pick the ones that
you think are most relevant to the topic at hand. And watch
yourself get better a little at a time.
SUMMARY-MAKE IT SAFE
Step Out
When others move to silence or violence, step out of the con­
versation and Make It Safe. When safety is restored, go back to
the issue at hand and continue the dialogue.
Decide Which Condition of Safety Is at Risk
• Mutual Purpose. Do others believe you care about their goals
in this conversation? Do they trust your motives?
• Mutual Respect. Do others believe you respect them?

=== Page 110 ===
92 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
Apologize When Appropriate
• When you've clearly violated respect, apologize.
Contrast to Fix Misunderstanding
• When others misunderstand either your purpose or your
intent, use Contrasting. Start with what you don't intend or
mean. Then explain what you do intend or mean.
CRIB to Get to Mutual Purpose
• When you are at cross-purposes, use four skills to get back to
Mutual Purpose:
• .commit to seek Mutual Purpose.
• Recognize the purpose behind the strategy.
• Invent a Mutual Purpose.
• B.rainstorm new strategies.

=== Page 111 ===
It's not how you play the game,
it's how the game plays you.
Master My Stories
How to Stay in Dialogue When
You're Angr}'t Scared, or Hurt
At this point you may be saying to yourself, "How am I supposed
to remember to do all this stuff-especially when my emotions
are raging like hot magma?"
This chapter explores how to gain control of crucial conver­
sations by learning how to take charge of your emotions. By
learning to exert influence over your own feelings, you'll place
yourself in a far better position to use all the tools we've
explored thus far.
HE MADE ME MAD!
How many times have you heard someone say: "He made me
mad!",? How many times have you said it? For instance, you're

=== Page 112 ===
94 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
sitting quietly at home watching TV and your mother-in-law (who
lives with you) walks in. She glances around and then starts pick­
ing up the mess you made a few minutes earlier when you
whipped up a batch of nachos. This ticks you off. She's always
smugly skulking around the house, thinking you're a slob.
A few minutes later when your spouse asks you why you're so
upset, you explain, "It's your mom again. I was lying here enjoy­
ing myself when she gave me that look, and it really got me
going. To be honest, I wish she would quit doing that. It's my
only day off, I'm relaxing quietly, and then she walks in and
pushes my buttons."
"Does she push your buttons?" your spouse asks. "Or do
you?"
That's an interesting question.
One thing's for certain. No matter who is doing the button
pushing, some people tend to react more explosively than others­
and to the same stimulus, no less. Why is that? For instance, what
enables some people to listen to withering feedback without flin­
ching, whereas others pitch a fit when you tell them they've got a
smear of salsa on their chin? Why is it that sometimes you your­
self can take a verbal blow to the gut without batting an eye, but
other times you go ballistic if someone so much as looks at you
sideways?
EMOTIONS DON'T JUST HAPPEN
To answer these questions, we'll start with two rather bold (and
sometimes unpopular) claims. Then, having tipped our hand, we'll
explain the logic behind each claim.
Claim One. Emotions don't settle upon you like a fog. They
are not foisted upon you by others. No matter how comfortable
it might make you feel saying it-others don't make you mad.
You make you mad. You and only you create your emotions.

=== Page 113 ===
MASTER MY STORIES 95
Claim Two. Once you've created your emotions, you have only
two options: You can act on them or be acted on by them. That
is, when it comes to strong emotions, you either find a way to
master them or fall hostage to them.
Here's how this all unfolds.
MARIA'S STORY
Consider Maria, a copywriter who is currently hostage to some
pretty strong emotions. She and her colleague Louis just
reviewed the latest draft of a proposal with their boss. During
the meeting, they were supposed to be jointly presenting their
latest ideas. But when Maria paused to take a breath, Louis took
over the presentation, making almost all the points they had
come up with together. When the boss turned to Maria for input,
there was nothing left for her to say.
Maria has been feeling humiliated and angry throughout this
project. First, Louis took their suggestions to the boss and dis­
cussed them behind her back. Second, he completely monopo­
lized the presentation. Consequently, Maria believes that Louis is
downplaying her contribution because she's the only woman on
the team.
She's getting fed up with his "boys' club" mentality. So what
does she do? She doesn't want to appear "oversensitive," so most
of the time she says nothing and just does her job. However, she
does manage to assert herself by occasionally getting in sarcastic
jabs about the way she's being treated.
"Sure I can get that printout for you. Should I just get your
coffee and whip up a bundt cake while I'm at it?" she mutters,
and rolls her eyes as she exits the room.
Louis, in tum, finds Maria's cheap shots and sarcasm puz­
zling. He's not sure what has Maria upset but is beginning to
despise her smug attitude and hostile reaction to most everything

=== Page 114 ===
96 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
he does. As a result, when the two work together, you could cut
the tension with a knife.
What's Making Maria Mad?
The worst at dialogue fall into the trap Maria has fallen into.
Maria is completely unaware of a dangerous assumption she's
making. She's upset at being overlooked and is keeping a pro­
fessional silence. She's assuming that her emotions and behavior
are the only right and reasonable reactions under the circum­
stances. She's convinced that anyone in her place would feel the
same way.
Here's the problem. Maria is treating her emotions as if they are
the only valid response. Since, in her mind, they are both justified
and accurate, she makes no effort to change or even question
them. In fact, in her view, Louis caused them. Ultimately, her
actions (saying nothing and taking cheap shots) are being driven
by these very emotions. Since she's not acting on her emotions, her
emotions are acting on her-controlling her behavior and driving
her deteriorating relationship with Louis. The worst at dialogue
are hostages to their emotions, and they don't even know it.
The good at dialogue realize that if they don't control their
emotions, matters will get worse. So they try something else.
They fake it. They choke down reactions and then do their best
to get back to dialogue. At least, they give it a shot.
Unfortunately, once they hit a rough spot in a crucial conver­
sation, their suppressed emotions come out of hiding. They show
up as tightened jaws or sarcastic comments. Dialogue takes a hit.
Or maybe their paralyzing fear causes them to avoid saying what
they really think. Meaning is cut off at the source. In any case,
their emotions sneak out of the cubbyhole they've been crammed
into and find a way into the conversation. It's never pretty, and
it always kills dialogue.

=== Page 115 ===
MASTER MY STORIES 97
The best at dialogue do something completely different. They
aren't held hostage by their emotions, nor do they try to hide or
suppress them. Instead, they act on their emotions. That is, when
they have strong feelings, they influence (and often change) their
emotions by thinking them out. As a result, they choose their
emotions, and by so doing, make it possible to choose behaviors
that create better results.
This, of course, is easier said than done. How do you rethink
yourself from an emotional and dangerous state into one that
puts you back in control?
Where should Maria start? To help rethink or gain control of
our emotions, let's see where our feelings come from in the first
place. Let's look at a model that helps us first examine and then
gain control of our own emotions.
Consider Maria. She's feeling hurt but is worried that if she
says something to Louis, she'll look too emotional, so she alter­
nates between holding her feelings inside (avoiding) and taking
cheap shots (masking).
As Figure 6-1 demonstrates, Maria's actions stem from her feel­
ings. First she feels and then she acts. That's easy enough, but it
Feel--......Act
hurt silence
worried cheap
shots
Figure 6-1. How Feelings Drive Actions

=== Page 116 ===
98 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
begs the question: What's causing Maria's feelings in the first
place?
Is it Louis's behavior? As was the case with the nacho-mother­
in-law, did Louis make Maria feel insulted and hurt? Maria
heard and saw Louis do something, she generated an emotion,
and then she acted out her feelings-using forms of masking and
avoiding.
So here's the big question: What happens between Louis act­
ing and Maria feeling? Is there an intermediate step that turns
someone else's actions into our feelings? If not, then it has to be
true that others make us feel the way we do.
Stories Create Feelings
As it turns out, there is an intermediate step between what oth­
ers do and how we feel. That's why, when faced with the same
circumstances, ten people may have ten different emotional
responses. For instance, with a coworker like Louis, some might
feel insulted whereas others merely feel curious. Some become
angry and others feel concern or even sympathy.
What is this intermediate step? Just after we observe what
others do and just before we feel some emotion about it, we tell
ourselves a story. That is, we add meaning to the action we
observed. To the simple behavior we add motive. Why were they
doing that? We also add judgment-is that good or bad? And
then, based on these thoughts or stories, our body responds with
an emotion.
Pictorially it looks like the model in Figure 6-2. We call this
model our Path to Action because it explains how emotions,
thoughts, and experiences lead to our actions.
You'll note that we've added telling a story to our model. We
observe, we tell a story, and then we feel. Although this addition
complicates things a bit, it also gives us hope. Since we and only

=== Page 117 ===
MASTER MY STORIES 99
See! Tell a
--.... Feel
Hear ---.... Story
Figure 6-2. The Path to Action
we are telling the story, we can take back control of our own
emotions by telling a different story. We now have a point of
leverage or control. If we can find a way to control the stories we
tell, by rethinking or retelling them, we can master our emotions
and, therefore, master our crucial conversations.
OUR STORIES
"Nothing in this world is good or bad,
but thinking makes it so.
"
-WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE
Stories explain what's going on. Exactly what are our stories?
They are our interpretations of the facts. They help explain what
we see and hear. They're theories we use to explain why, how,
and what. For instance, Maria asks: "Why does Louis take over?
l ie doesn't trust my ability to communicate. He thinks that
because I'm a woman, people won't listen to me."
Our stories also help explain how. "How am I supposed to
juuge all of this? Is this a good or a bad thing? Louis thinks I'm
incompetent. and this is bad."

=== Page 118 ===
100 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
Finally, a story might also include what. "What should I do
about all this? If I say something, he'll think I'm a whiner or
oversensitive or militant, so it's best to clam up."
Of course, as we come up with our own meaning or stories, it
isn't long until our body responds with strong feelings or emo­
tions-they're directly linked to our judgments of right/wrong,
good/bad, kind/selfish, fair/unfair, etc. Maria's story yields anger
and frustration. These feelings, in turn, drive Maria to her
actions-toggling back and forth between clamming up and tak­
ing an occasional cheap shot (see Figure 6-3).
Even if you don't realize it, you are telling yourself stories.
When we teach people that it's our stories that drive our emotions
and not other people's actions, someone inevitably raises a hand
and says, "Wait a minute! I didn't notice myself telling a story.
When that guy laughed at me during my presentation, I just felt
angry. The feelings came first; the thoughts came second."
Storytelling typically happens blindingly fast. When we
believe we're at risk, we tell ourselves a story so quickly that we
don't even know we're doing it. If you don't believe this is true,
ask yourself whether you always become angry when someone
See! Tell a
Hear Story Feel
Louis He doesn't hurt $ilenoe
makes all-....... trust mel-.......womed-"""'Cheap
the points, thinkS I'm shots
meets prt- weak. If I
vately With speak up
the boss I'U Jook too
emotional
Figure 6-3. Maria's Path to Action

=== Page 119 ===
MASTER MY STORIES 101
laughs at you. If sometimes you do and sometimes you don't,
then your response isn't hardwired. That means something goes
on between others laughing and you feeling. In truth, you tell a
story. You may not remember it, but you tell a story.
Any set of facts can be used to tell an infinite number of sto­
ries. Stories are just that, stories. These fabrications could be
told in any of thousands of different ways. For instance, Maria
could just as easily have decided that Louis didn't realize she
cared so much about the project. She could have concluded that
Louis was feeling unimportant and this was a way of showing he
was valuable. Or maybe he had been burned in the past because
he hadn't personally seen through every detail of a project. Any
of these stories would have fit the facts and would have created
very different emotions.
If we take control of our stories, they won't control us. People
who excel at dialogue are able to influence their emotions during
crucial conversations. They recognize that while it's true that at
first we are in control of the stories we tell-after all, we do make
them up of our own accord-once they're told, the stories con­
trol us. They control how we feel and how we act. And as a result,
they control the results we get from our crucial conversations.
But it doesn't have to be this way. We can tell different stories
and break the loop. In fact, until we tell different stories, we
cannot break the loop.
If you want improved results from your crucial conversations,
change the stories you tell yourself-even while you're in the
middle of the fray.
SKillS FOR MASTERING OUR STORIES
What's the most effective way to come up with different stories?
The best at dialogue find a way to first slow down and then take
charge of their Path to Action. Here's how.

=== Page 120 ===
102 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
Retrace Your Path
To slow down the lightning-quick storytelling process and the
subsequent flow of adrenaline, retrace your Path to Action-one
element at a time. This calls for a bit of mental gymnastics. First
you have to stop what you're currently doing. Then you have to
get in touch with why you're doing it. Here's how to retrace your
path:
• [Act] Notice your behavior. Ask:
Am I in some form of silence or violence?
• [Feel] Get in touch with your feelings.
What emotions are encouraging me to act this way?
• [Tell story] Analyze your stories.
What story is creating these emotions?
• [See/hear] Get back to the facts.
What evidence do I have to support this story?
By retracing your path one element at a time, you put yourself
in a position to think about, question, and change any one or
more of the elements.
Notice Your Behavior
Why would you stop and retrace your Path to Action in the first
place? Certainly if you're constantly stopping what you're doing
and looking for your underlying motive and thoughts, you won't
even be able to put on your shoes without thinking about it for
who knows how long. You'll die of analysis paralysis.
Actually, you shouldn't constantly stop and question your
actions. If you Learn to Look (as we suggested in Chapter 4) and
note that you yourself are slipping into silence or violence, you
have good reason to stop and take stock.

=== Page 121 ===
MASTER MY STORIES 103
But looking isn't enough. You must take an honest look at
what you're doing. If you tell yourself a story that your violent
behavior is a "necessary tactic," you won't see the need to recon­
sider your actions. If you immediately jump in with "they started
it," or otherwise find yourself rationalizing your behavior, you
also won't feel compelled to change. Rather than stop and review
what you're doing, you'll devote your time to justifying your
actions to yourself and others.
When an unhelpful story is driving you to silence or violence,
stop and consider how others would see your actions. For exam­
ple, if the 60 Minutes camera crew replayed this scene on
national television, how would you look? What would they tell
about your behavior?
Not only do those who are best at crucial conversations notice
when they're slipping into silence or violence, but they are also
able to admit it. They don't wallow in self-doubt, of course, but
they do recognize the problem and begin to take corrective
action. The moment they realize that they're killing dialogue,
they review their own Path to Action.
Get In Touch with Your Feelings
As skilled individuals begin to retrace their own Path to Action,
they immediately move from examining their own unhealthy
behavior to exploring their feelings or emotions. At first glance
this task sounds easy. "I'm angry!" you think to yourself. What
could be easier?
Actually, identifying your emotions is more difficult than you
might imagine. In fact, many people are emotionally illiterate.
When asked to describe how they're feeling, they use words such
as "bad" or "angry" or "frightened"-which would be okay if
these were accurate descriptors, but often they're not.
Individuals say they're angry when, in fact, they're feeling a mix
01' embarrassment and surprise. Or they suggest they're unhappy

=== Page 122 ===
104 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
when they're feeling violated. Perhaps they suggest they're upset
when they're really feeling humiliated and cheated.
Since life doesn't consist of a series of vocabulary tests, you
might wonder what difference words can make. But words do
matter. Knowing what you're really feeling helps you take a more
accurate look at what is going on and why. For instance, you're
far more likely to take an honest look at the story you're telling
yourself if you admit you're feeling both embarrassed and sur­
prised rather than simply angry.
How about you? When experiencing strong emotions, do you
stop and think about your feelings? If so, do you use a rich
vocabulary, or do you mostly draw from terms such as "bummed
out" and "furious"? Second, do you talk openly with others
about how you feel? Do you willingly talk with loved ones about
what's going on inside of you? Third, in so doing, is your vocab­
ulary robust and accurate?
It's important to get in touch with your feelings, and to do so,
you may want to expand your emotional vocabulary.
Analyze Your Stories
Question your feelings and stories. Once you've identified what
you're feeling, you have to stop and ask, given the circum­
stances, is it the right feeling? Meaning, of course, are you telling
the right story? After all, feelings come from stories, and stories
are our own invention.
The first step to regaining emotional control is to challenge
the illusion that what you're feeling is the only right emotion
under the circumstances. This may be the hardest step, but it's
also the most important one. By questioning our feelings, we
open ourselves up to question our stories. We challenge the com­
fortable conclusion that our story is right and true. We willingly
question whether our emotions (very real), and the story behind
them (only one of many possible explanations), are accurate.

=== Page 123 ===
MASTER MY STORIES 105
For instance, what were the facts in Maria's story? She saw
Louis give the whole presentation. She heard the boss talk about
meeting with Louis to discuss the project when she wasn't pres­
ent. That was the beginning of Maria's Path to Action.
Don't confuse stories with facts. Sometimes you fail to ques­
tion your stories because you see them as immutable facts. When
you generate stories in the blink of an eye, you can get so caught
up in the moment that you begin to believe your stories are facts.
They feel like facts. You confuse subjective conclusions with
steel-hard data points. For example, in trying to ferret out facts
from story, Maria might say, "He's a male chauvinist pig-that's
a fact! Ask anyone who has seen how he treats me!"
"He's a male chauvinist pig" is not a fact. It's the story that
Maria created to give meaning to the facts. The facts could mean
just about anything. As we said earlier, others could watch Maria's
interactions with Louis and walk away with different stories.
Get Back to the Facts
Separate fact from story by focusing on behavior. To separate
fact from story, get back to the genuine source of your feelings.
Test your ideas against a simple criterion: Can you see or hear
this thing you're calling a fact? Was it an actual behavior?
For example, it is a fact that Louis "gave 95 percent of the pre­
sentation and answered all but one question." This is specific,
objective, and verifiable. Any two people watching the meeting
would make the same observation. However, the statement "He
doesn't trust me" is a conclusion. It explains what you think, not
what the other person did. Conclusions are subjective.
Spot the story by watching for "hot" words. Here's another tip.
To avoid confusing story with fact, watch for "hot" terms. For
cxample, when assessing the facts, you might say, "She scowled at
mc" or "He made a sarcastic comment." Words such as "scowl"
anu "sarcastic" are hot terms. They express judgments and attribu-

=== Page 124 ===
106 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
tions that, in turn, create strong emotions. They are story, not fact.
Notice how much different it is when you say: "Her eyes pinched
shut and her lips tightened," as opposed to "She scowled at me." In
Maria's case, she suggested that Louis was controlling and didn't
respect her. Had she focused on his behavior (he talked a lot and
met with the boss one-on-one), this less volatile description would
have allowed for any number of interpretations. For example, per­
haps Louis was nervous, concerned, or unsure of himself.
Watch for Three "Clever" Stories
As we begin to piece together why people are doing what they're
doing (or equally important, why we're doing what we're doing),
with time and experience we become quite good at coming up
with explanations that serve us well. Either our stories are com­
pletely accurate and propel us in healthy directions, or they're
quite inaccurate but justify our current behavior-making us feel
good about ourselves and calling for no need to change.
It's the second kind of story that routinely gets us into trouble.
For example, we move to silence or violence, and then we come
up with a perfectly plausible reason for why it's okay. "Of course
I yelled at him. Did you see what he did? He deserved it." "Hey,
don't be gi"ing me the evil eye. I had no other choice." We call
these imaginative and self-serving concoctions "clever stories."
They're clever because they allow us to feel good about behaving
badly. Better yet, they allow us to feel good about behaving badly
even while achieving abysmal results.
Among all of the clever stories we tell, here are the three most
common.
Victim Stories-lilt's Not My Fault"
The first of the clever stories is a Victim Story. Victim Stories, as
you might imagine, make us out to be innocent sufferers. The
theme is always the same. The other person is bad and wrong,

=== Page 125 ===
MASTER MY STORIES 107
and we are good and right. Other people do bad things, and we
suffer as a result.
In truth, there is such a thing as an innocent victim. You're
stopped in the street and held up at gunpoint. When an event
such as this occurs, it's a sad fact, not a story. You are a victim.
But all tales of victimization are not so one-sided. When you
tell a Victim Story, you ignore the role you played in the prob­
lem. You tell your story in a way that judiciously avoids facts
about whatever you have done (or neglected to do) that might
have contributed to the problem.
For instance, last week your boss took you off a big project,
and it hurt your feelings. You complained to everyone about
how bad you felt. Of course, you failed to let your boss know
that you were behind on an important project, leaving him
high and dry-which is why he removed you in the first place.
This part of the story you leave out because, hey, he made you
feel bad.
To help support your Victim Stories you speak of nothing but
your noble motives. "I took longer because I was trying to beat
the standard specs." Then you tell yourself that you're being pun­
ished for your virtues, not your vices. "He just doesn't appreci­
ate a person with my superb attention to detail." (This added
twist turns you from victim into martyr. What a bonus!)
Villain Stories -"It's All Your Fault"
We create these nasty little tales by turning normal, decent
human beings into villains. We impute bad motive, and then we
tell everyone about the evils of the other party as if somehow
'
we re doing the world a huge favor.
For example, we describe a boss who is zealous about quality
liS a control freak. When our spouse is upset that we didn't keep
a commitment , we see him or her as inflexible and stubborn.
In Victim Stories we eX�lggcrate our own innocence. In Villain

=== Page 126 ===
1 08 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
Stories we overemphasize the other person's guilt. We automatical­
ly assume the worst possible motives while ignoring any possible
good or neutral intentions a person may have. Labeling is a common
device in Villain Stories. For example, "I can't believe that bonehead
gave me bad materials again." By employing the handy label, we are
now dealing not with a complex human being, but with a bonehead.
Not only do Villain Stories help us blame others for bad
results, but they also set us up to then do whatever we want to
the "villains." After all, we can feel okay insulting or abusing a
bonehead-whereas we might have to be more careful with a
living, breathing person. Then when we fail to get the results we
really want, we stay stuck in our ineffective behavior because,
after all, look who we're dealing with!
Watch for the double standard. When you pay attention to
Victim and Villain Stories and catch them for what they are­
unfair characterizations-you begin to see the terrible double
standard we use when our emotions are out of control. When we
make mistakes, we tell a Victim Story by claiming our intentions
were innocent and pure. "Sure 1 was late getting home and didn't
call you, but I couldn't let the team down!" On the other hand,
when others do things that hurt us, we tell Villain Stories in
which we invent terrible motives for others based on how their
actions affected us. "You are so thoughtless! You could have
called me and told me you were going to be late."
Helpless Stories-"There's Nothing Else I Can Do"
Finally come Helpless Stories. In these fabrications we make our­
selves out to be powerless to do anything. We convince ourselves
that there are no healthy alternatives for dealing with our predica­
ment, which justifies the action we're about to take. A Helpless
Story might suggest, "If 1 didn't yell at my son, he wouldn't listen."
Or on the flip side, "If I told my husband this, he would just be

=== Page 127 ===
MASTER MY STORIES 109
defensive." While Villian and Victim Stories look back to explain
why we're in the situation we're in, Helpless Stories look forward
to explain why we can't do anything to change our situation.
It's particularly easy to act helpless when we tum others'
behavior into fixed and unchangeable traits. For example, when
we decide our boss is a "control freak" (Villain Story), we are
less inclined to give him feedback because, after all, control
freaks like him don't accept feedback (Helpless Story). Nothing
we can do will change that fact.
As you can see, Helpless Stories often stem from Villain Stories
and typically offer us nothing more than Sucker's Choices.
Why We Tell Clever Stories
They match reality. Sometimes the stories we tell are accurate.
The other person is trying to cause us harm, we are innocent vic­
tims, or maybe we really can't do much about the problem. It can
happen. It's not common, but it can happen.
They get us off the hook. More often than not, our conclusions
transform from reasonable explanations to clever stories when
they conveniently excuse us from any responsibility-when, in
reality, we have been partially responsible. The other person isn't
bad and wrong, and we aren't right and good. The truth lies
somewhere in the middle. However, if we can make others out
as wrong and ourselves out as right, we're off the hook. Better
yet, once we've demonized others, we can even insult and abuse
them if we want.
Clever stories keep us from acknowledging our own sellouts.
By now it should be clear that clever stories cause us problems.
A reasonable question at this point is, "If they're so terribly hurt­
ful, why do we ever tell clever stories?"
Our need to tell clever stories often starts with our own sellouts.
l,ike it or not, we usually don't begin telling stories that justify our
ad ions until we have done something that we feel a need to

=== Page 128 ===
110 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
justify. 1
We sell out when we consciously act against our own sense of
what's right. And after we've sold out, we have only two choices:
own up to our sellout, or try to justify it. And if we don't admit
to our errors, we inevitably look for ways to justify them. That's
when we begin to tell clever stories.
Let's look at an example of a sellout: You're driving in heavy
traffic. You begin to pass cars that are attempting to merge into
your lane. A car very near you has accelerated and is entering your
lane. A thought strikes you that you should let him in. It's the nice
thing to do, and you'd want someone to let you in. But you don't.
You accelerate forward and close the gap. What happens next?
You begin to have thoughts like these: "He can't just crowd in on
me. What a jerk! I've been fighting this traffic a long time. Besides,
I've got an important appointment to get to." And so on.
This story makes you the innocent victim and the other per­
son the nasty villain. Under the influence of this story you now
feel justified in not doing what you originally thought you should
have done. You also ignore what you would think of others who
did the same thing-"That jerk didn't let me in!"
Consider an example more related to crucial conversations.
Your spouse has an annoying habit. It's not a big deal, but you
feel you should mention it. But you don't. Instead, you just huff
or roll your eyes, hoping that will send the message. Unfortun­
ately, your spouse doesn't pick up the hint and continues the habit.
Your annoyance turns to resentment. You feel disgusted that your
spouse is so thick that he or she can't pick up an obvious hint. And
besides, you shouldn't have to mention this anyway-any reason­
able person should notice this on his or her own! Do you have to
point out everything? From this point forward you begin to make
insulting wisecracks about the issue until it escalates into an ugly
confrontation.
Notice the order of the events in both of these examples. What

=== Page 129 ===
MASTER MY STORI ES 111
came first, the story or the sellout? Did you convince yourself of
the other driver's selfishness and then not let him in? Of course
not. You had no reason to think he was selfish until you needed
an excuse for your own selfish behavior. You didn't start telling
clever stories until after you failed to do something you knew you
should have done. Your spouse's annoying habit didn't become a
source of resentment until you became part of the problem. You
got upset because you sold out. And the clever story helped you
feel good about being rude.
Sellouts are often not big events. In fact, they can be so small
that they're easy for us to overlook when we're crafting our
clever stories. Here are some common ones:
• You believe you should help someone, but don't.
• You believe you should apologize, but don't.
• You believe you should stay late to finish up on a commitment,
but go home instead.
• You say yes when you know you should say no, then hope no
one follows up to see if you keep your commitment.
• You believe you should talk to someone about concerns you
have with him or her, but don't.
• You do less than your share and think you should acknowl­
edge it, but say nothing knowing no one else will bring it up
either.
• You believe you should listen respectfully to feedback, but
become defensive instead.
• You see problems with a plan someone presents and think you
should speak up, but don't.
• You fail to complete an assignment on time and believe you
should let others know, but don't.

=== Page 130 ===
112 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
• You know you have information a coworker could use, but
keep it to yourself.
Even small sellouts like these get us started telling clever stories.
When we don't admit to our own mistakes, we obsess about others'
faults, our innocence, and our powerlessness to do anything other
than what we're already doing. We tell a clever story when we want
self-justification more than results. Of course, self-justification is
not what we really want, but we certainly act as if it is.
With that sad fact in mind, let's focus on what we really want.
Let's look at the final Master My Stories skill.
Tell the Rest of the Story
Once we've learned to recognize the clever stories we tell our­
selves, we can move to the final Master My Stories skill. The dia­
logue-smart recognize that they're telling clever stories, stop,
and then do what it takes to tell a useful story. A useful story, by
definition, creates emotions that lead to healthy action-such as
dialogue.
And what transforms a clever story into a useful one? The rest
of the story. That's because clever stories have one characteristic
in common: They're incomplete. Clever stories omit crucial
information about us, about others, and about our options. Only
by including all of these essential details can clever stories be
transformed into useful ones.
What's the best way to fill in the missing details? Quite sim­
ply, it's done by turning victims into actors, villains into humans,
and the helpless into the able. Here's how.
Turn victims into actors. If you notice that you're talking
about yourself as an innocent victim (and you weren't held up at
gunpoint), ask:
• Am I pretending not to notice my role in the problem?

=== Page 131 ===
MASTER MY STORIES 113
This question jars you into facing up to the fact that maybe,
just maybe, you did something to help cause the problem. Instead
of being a victim, you were an actor. This doesn't necessarily
mean you had malicious motives. Perhaps your contribution was
merely a thoughtless omission. Nonetheless, you contributed.
For example, a coworker constantly leaves the harder or nox­
ious tasks for you to complete. You've frequently complained to
friends and loved ones about being exploited. The parts you
leave out of the story are that you smile broadly when your boss
compliments you for your willingness to take on challenging
jobs, and you've never said anything to your coworker. You've
hinted, but that's about it.
The first step in telling the rest of this story would be to add
these important facts to your account. By asking what role
you've played, you begin to realize how selective your perception
has been. You become aware of how you've minimized your own
mistakes while you've exaggerated the role of others.
Turn villains into humans. When you find yourself labeling or
otherwise vilifying others, stop and ask:
• Why would a reasonable, rational, and decent person do what
this person is doing?
This particular question humanizes others. As we search for
plausible answers to it, our emotions soften. Empathy often
replaces judgment, and depending upon how we've treated oth­
ers, personal accountability replaces self-justification.
For instance, that coworker who seems to conveniently miss
out on the tough jobs told you recently that she could see you
were struggling with an important assignment, and yesterday
(while you were tied up on a pressing task) she pitched in and
completed the job for you. You were instantly suspicious. She
W'lS trying to make you look bad by completing a high-profile
jub. Huw dare she prctcnd to be helpful when her real goal was

=== Page 132 ===
114 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
to discredit you while tooting her own hom! Well, that's the
story you've told yourself.
But what if she really were a reasonable, rational, and decent
person? What if she had no motive other than to give you a
hand? Isn't it a bit early to be vilifying her? And if you do, don't
you run the risk of ruining a relationship? Might you go off half­
cocked, accuse her, and then learn you were wrong?
Our purpose for asking why a reasonable, rational, and decent
person might be acting a certain way is not to excuse others for
any bad things they may be doing. If they are, indeed, guilty,
we'll have time to deal with that later. The purpose of the
humanizing question is to deal with our own stories and emo­
tions. It provides us with still another tool for working on our­
selves first by providing a variety of possible reasons for the
other person's behavior.
In fact, with experience and maturity we learn to worry less
about others' intent and more about the effect others' actions are
having on us. No longer are we in the game of rooting out
unhealthy motives. And here's the good news. When we reflect
on alternative motives, not only do we soften our emotions, but
equally important, we relax our absolute certainty long enough
to allow for dialogue-the only reliable way of discovering oth­
ers' genuine motives.
Turn the helpless into the able. Finally, when you catch your­
self bemoaning your own helplessness, you can tell the complete
story by returning to your original motive. To do so, stop and ask:
• What do I really want? For me? For others? For the relation­
ship?
Then, kill the Sucker's Choice that's made you feel helpless to
choose anything other than silence or violence. Do this by asking:
• What would I do right now if I really wanted these results?

=== Page 133 ===
MASTER MY STORI ES 115
For example, you now find yourself insulting your coworker
for not pitching in with a tough job. Your coworker seems sur­
prised at your strong and "out of the blue" reaction. In fact, she's
staring at you as if you've slipped a cog. You, of course, have told
yourself that she is purposefully avoiding noxious tasks, and that
despite your helpful hints, she has made no changes.
"I have to get brutal," you tell yourself. "I don't like it, but if
1 don't offend her, I'll be stuck doing the grunt work forever."
You've strayed from what you really want-to share work
equally and to have a good relationship. You've given up on half
of your goals by making a Sucker's Choice. "Oh well, better to
offend her than to be made a fool."
What should you be doing instead? Openly, honestly, and
effectively discussing the problem-not taking potshots and
then justifying yourself. When you refuse to make yourself help­
less, you're forced to hold yourself accountable for using your
dialogue skills rather than bemoaning your weakness.
MARIA'S NEW STORY
To see how this all fits together, let's circle back to Maria. Let's
assume she's retraced her Path to Action and separated the facts
from the stories. Doing this has helped her realize that the story
she told was incomplete, defensive, and hurtful. When she
watched for the Three Clever Stories, she saw them with painful
clarity. Now she's ready to tell the rest of the story. So she asks
herself:
• Am I pretending not to notice my role in the problem?
"When I found out that Louis was holding project meetings
without me, I felt like I should ask him about why I wasn't
included. I believed that if I did, I could open a dialogue that
would help us work better together. But then I didn't, and as

=== Page 134 ===
116 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
my resentment grew, [ was even less interested in broaching
the subject. "
• Why would a reasonable, rational, and decent person do what
Louis is doing?
"He really cares about producing good-quality work. Maybe
he doesn't realize that I'm as committed to the success of the
project as he is. "
• What do I really want?
"[ want a respectful relationship with Louis. And [ want
recognition for the work [ do. "
• What would I do right now if I really wanted these results?
''I'd make an appointment to sit down with Louis and talk
about how we work together. "
As we tell the rest of the story, we free ourselves from the poi­
soning effects of unhealthy emotions. Best of all, as we regain
control and move back to dialogue, we become masters of our
own emotions rather than hostages.
And what about Maria? What did she actually do? She sched­
uled a meeting with Louis. As she prepared for the meeting, she
refused to feed her ugly and incomplete stories, admitted her
own role in the problem, and entered the conversation with an
open mind. Perhaps Louis wasn't trying to make her appear bad
or fill in for her incompetence.
As Maria sat down with Louis, she found a way to tentatively
share what she had observed. (We'll look at exactly how to do
this in the next chapter.) Fortunately, not only did Maria master
her story, but she knew how to talk about it as well. While
engaging in healthy dialogue, Louis apologized for not includ­
ing her in meetings with the boss. He explained that he was try­
ing to give the boss a heads-up on some controversial parts of

=== Page 135 ===
MASTER MY STORIES 117
the presentation-and realized in retrospect that he shouldn't
have done this without her. He also apologized for dominating
during the presentation. Maria learned from the conversation
that Louis tends to talk more when he gets nervous. He sug­
gested that they each be responsible for either the first or sec­
ond half of the presentation and stick to their assignments so he
would be less likely to crowd her out. The discussion ended
with both of them understanding the other's perspective and
Louis promising to be more sensitive in the future.
SUMMARY-MASTER MY STORIES
If strong emotions are keeping you stuck in silence or violence,
try this.
Retrace Your Path
Notice your behavior. If you find yourself moving away from
dialogue, ask yourself what you're really doing.
• Am I in some form of silence or violence?
Get in touch with your feelings. Learn to accurately identify
the emotions behind your story.
• What emotions are encouraging me to act this way?
Analyze your stories. Question your conclusions and look for
other possible explanations behind your story.
• What story is creating these emotions?
Get back to the facts. Abandon your absolute certainty by dis­
tinguishing between hard facts and your invented story.
• What evidence do I have to support this story?

=== Page 136 ===
118 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
Watch for clever stories. Victim, Villain, and Helpless Stories
sit at the top of the list.
Tell the Rest of the Story
Ask:
• Am I pretending not to notice my role in the problem?
• Why would a reasonable, rational, and decent person do this?
• What do I really want?
• What would I do right now if I really wanted these results?

=== Page 137 ===
7
Outspoken by whom?
-DOROTHY PARKBR
WHEN TOLD THAT SHE WAS WRY OUTSPOKEN
STATE My Path
How to Speak Persuasivel}/t
Not Abrasively
So far we've gone to great pains to prepare ourselves for crucial
conversations. Here's what we've learned. Our hearts need to be
in the right place. We need to pay close attention to crucial
conversations-particularly when people start feeling unsafe.
And heaven forbid that we should tell ourselves clever and
unhelpful stories.
So let's say that we are well prepared. We're ready to open our
mouths and start sharing our pool of meaning. That's right,
we're actually going to talk. Now what?
Most of the time we walk into a discussion and slide into
autopilot. "Hi, how are the kids? What's going on at work?"
What could be easier than talking? We know thousands of words

=== Page 138 ===
120 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
and generally weave them into conversations that suit our needs.
Most of the time.
However, when stakes rise and our emotions kick in, well,
that's when we open our mouths and don't do so well. In fact, as
we suggested earlier, the more important the discussion, the less
likely we are to be on our best behavior. More specifically, we
advocate or express our views quite poorly.
To help us improve our advocacy skills, we'll examine two
challenging situations. First, we'll look at five skills for talking
when what we have to say could easily make others defensive.
Second, we'll explore how these same skills help us state our
opinions when we believe so strongly in something that we risk
shutting others down rather than opening them up to our ideas.
SHARING RISKY MEANING
Adding information to the pool of meaning can be quite difficult
when the ideas we're about to dump into the collective conscious­
ness contain delicate, unattractive, or controversial opinions.
"I'm sorry, Marta, but people simply don't like working with
you. You've been asked to leave the special-projects team."
It's one thing to argue that your company needs to shift from
green to red packaging; it's quite another to tell a person that he
or she is offensive or unlikable or has a controlling leadership
style. When the topic turns from things to people, it's always
more difficult, and to nobody's surprise, some people are better
at it than others.
When it comes to sharing touchy information, the worst alter­
nate between bluntly dumping their ideas into the pool and say­
ing nothing at all. Either they start with: "You're not going to like
this, but, hey, somebody has to be honest . . ." (a classic Sucker's
Choice), or they simply stay mum.

=== Page 139 ===
STATE MY PATH 121
Fearful they could easily destroy a healthy relationship, those
who are good at dialogue say some of what's on their minds but
understate their views out of fear of hurting others. They talk,
but they sugarcoat their message.
The best at dialogue speak their minds completely and do it in
a way that makes it safe for others to hear what they have to say
and respond to it as well. They are both totally frank and com­
pletely respectful.
MAINTAIN SAFETY
In order to speak honestly when honesty could easily offend oth­
ers, we have to find a way to maintain safety. That's a bit like
telling someone to smash another person in the nose, but, you
know, don't hurt him. How can we speak the unspeakable and still
maintain respect? Actually, it can be done if you know how to
carefully blend three ingredients-confidence, humility, and skill.
Confidence. Most people simply won't hold delicate conversa­
tions-well, at least not with the right person. For instance, your
colleague Brian goes home at night and tells his wife that his boss,
Fernando, is micromanaging him to within an inch of his life. He
says the same thing over lunch when talking with his pals. Every­
one knows what Brian thinks about Fernando-except, of course,
Fernando.
People who are skilled at dialogue have the confidence to say
what needs to be said to the person who needs to hear it. They
are confident that their opinions deserve to be placed in the pool
of meaning. They are also confident that they can speak openly
without brutalizing others or causing undue offense.
Humility. Confidence does not equate to arrogance or pig­
headedness. Skilled people are confident that they have some­
thing to say, but also realize that others have valuable input. They
al'e humble enough to realize that they don't have a monopoly on

=== Page 140 ===
122 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
the truth. Their opinions provide a starting point but not the final
word. They may currently believe something but realize that with
new information they may change their minds. This means
they're willing to both express their opinions and encourage oth­
ers to do the same
Skill. Finally, people who willingly share delicate information
are good at doing it. That's why they're confident in the first
place. They don't make a Sucker's Choice because they've found
a path that allows for both candor and safety. They speak the
unspeakable, and people are grateful for their honesty.
Good Night and Good-Bye!
To see how to discuss sensitive issues, let's look at an enormously
difficult problem. Bob has just walked in the door, and his wife,
Carole, looks upset. He can tell from her swollen eyes that she's
been crying. Only when he walks in the door, Carole doesn't turn
to him for comfort. Instead, she looks at him with an expression
that says "How could you?" Bob doesn't know it yet, but Carole
thinks he's having an affair. He's not.
How did Carole come to this dangerous and wrong con­
clusion? Earlier that day she had been going over the credit card
statement when she noticed a charge from the Good Night
Motel-a cheap place located not more than a mile from their
home. "Why would he stay in a motel so close to home?" she
wonders. "And why didn't I know about it?" Then it hits her­
"That unfaithful jerk!"
Now what's the worst way Carole might handle this (one that
doesn't involve packing up and moving back to Wisconsin)?
What's the worst way of talking about the problem? Most peo­
ple agree that jumping in with an ugly accusation followed by a
threat is a good candidate for that distinction. It's also what most
people do, and Carole is no exception.

=== Page 141 ===
STATE MY PATH 123
"I can't believe you're doing this to me," she says in a painful
tone.
"Doing what?" Bob asks-not knowing what she's talking
about but figuring that whatever it is, it can't be good.
"You know what I'm talking about," she says, continuing to
keep Bob on edge.
"Do 1 need to apologize for missing her birthday?" Bob won­
ders to himself. "No, it's not even summer and her birthday is on
. . . w ell, it's sweltering on her birthday."
"I'm sorry, 1 don't know what you're talking about," he
responds, taken aback.
"You're having an affair, and 1 have proof right here!" Carole
explains holding up a piece of crumpled paper.
"What's on that paper that says I'm having an affair?" he asks,
completely befuddled because (1) he's not having an affair and (2)
the paper contains not a single compromising photo.
"It's a motel bill, you jerk. You take some woman to a motel,
and you put it on the credit card?! 1 can't believe you're doing
this to me!"
Now if Carole were certain that Bob was having an affair, per­
haps this kind of talk would be warranted. It may not be the best
way to work through the issue, but Bob would at least understand
why Carole made the accusations and hurled threats.
But, in truth, she only has a piece of paper with some num­
bers on it. This tangible piece of evidence has made her suspi­
cious. How should she talk about this nasty hunch in a way that
leads to dialogue?
STATE MY PATH
I f Carole's goal is to have a healthy conversation about a tough
topic (e.g., I think you're having an affair), her only hope is to

=== Page 142 ===
124 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
stay in dialogue. That holds true for anybody with any crucial
conversation (i.e., It feels like you micromanage me; I fear you're
using drugs). That means that despite your worst suspicions, you
shouldn't violate respect. In a similar vein, you shouldn't kill
safety with threats and accusations.
So what should you do? Start with Heart. Think about what you
really want and how dialogue can help you get it. And master your
story-realize that you may be jumping to a hasty Victim, Villain,
or Helpless Story. The best way to fmd out the true story is not to
act out the worst story you can generate. That will lead to self­
destructive silence and violence games. Think about other possible
explanations long enough to temper your emotions so you can get
to dialogue. Besides, if it turns out you're right about your initial
impression, there will be plenty of time for confrontations later on.
Once you've worked on yourself to create the right conditions
for dialogue, you can then draw upon five distinct skills that can
help you talk about even the most sensitive topics. These five tools
can be easily remembered with the acronym STATE. It stands for:
• Share your facts
• Tell your story
• Ask for others' paths
• Talk tentatively
• E.ncourage testing
The first three skills describe what to do. The last two tell how
to do it.
The "What" Skills
,Share Your Facts
In the last chapter we suggested that if you retrace your Path to
Action to the source, you eventually arrive at the ("acts. For

=== Page 143 ===
STATE MY PATH 125
example, Carole found the credit card invoice. That's a fact. She
then told a story-Bob's having an affair. Next, she felt betrayed
and horrified. Finally, she attacked Bob-"I should never have
married you!" The whole interaction was fast, predictable, and
very ugly.
What if Carole took a different route-one that started with
facts? What if she were able to suspend the ugly story she told her­
self (perhaps think of an alternative story) and then start her con­
versation with the facts? Wouldn't that be a safer way to go?
"Maybe," she muses, "there is a good reason behind all of this.
Why don't I start with the suspicious bill and then go from there?"
If she started there, she'd be right. The best way to share your
view is to follow your Path to Action from beginning to end­
the same way you traveled it (Figure 7-1). Unfortunately, when
we're drunk on adrenaline, our tendency is to do precisely the
opposite. Since we're obsessing on our emotions and stories,
that's what we start with. Of course, this is the most controver­
sial, least influential, and most insulting way we could begin.
To make matters worse, this strategy creates still another self­
fulfilling prophecy. We're so anxious to blurt out our ugly stories
See! Tell a
--... Feel
Hear --... Story
Figure 7-1. The Path to Action

=== Page 144 ===
126 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
that we say things in extremely ineffective ways. Then, when
we get bad results (and we are going to get bad results), we tell
ourselves that we just can't share risky views without creating
problems. So the next time we've got something sticky to say,
we're even more reluctant to say it. We hold it inside where the
story builds up steam, and when we do eventually share our
horrific story, we do so with a vengeance. The cycle starts all
over again.
Facts are the least controversial. Facts provide a safe beginning.
By their very nature, facts aren't controversial. That's why we call
them facts. For example, consider the statement: "Yesterday you
arrived at work twenty minutes late." No dispute there.
Conclusions, on the other hand, are highly controversial. For
example: "You can't be trusted." That's hardly a fact. Actually, it's
more like an insult, and it can certainly be disputed. Eventually we
may want to share our conclusions, but we certainly don't want to
open up with a controversy.
Facts are the most persuasive. In addition to being less contro­
versial, facts are also more persuasive than subjective conclusions.
Facts form the foundation of belief. So if you want to persuade
others, don't start with your stories. Start with your observations.
For example, which of the following do you fmd more persuasive?
"I want you to stop sexually harassing me!"
or
"When you talk to me, your eyes move up and down rather
than look at my face. And sometimes you put your hand on
my shoulder."
While we're speaking here about being persuasive, let's add
that our goal is not to persuade others that we are right. We
aren't trying to "win" the dialogue. We just want our meaning to
get a fair hearing. We're trying to help others sec how a rca SOIl-

=== Page 145 ===
STATE MY PATH 127
able, rational, and decent person could end up with the story
we're carrying. That's all.
When we start with shocking or offensive conclusions ("Quit
groping me with your eyes!" or "I think we should declare bank­
ruptcy"), we actually encourage others to tell Villain Stories
about us. Since we've given them no facts to support our con­
clusion, they make up reasons we're saying these things. They're
likely to believe we're either stupid or evil.
So if your goal is to help others see how a reasonable, ration­
al, and decent person could think what you're thinking, start
with your facts.
And if you aren't sure what your facts are (your story is
absolutely filling your brain), take the time to think them
through before you enter the crucial conversation. Take the time
to sort out facts from conclusions. Gathering the facts is the
homework required for crucial conversations.
Facts are the least insulting. If you do want to share your
story, don't start with it. Your story (particularly if it has led to a
rather ugly conclusion) could easily surprise and insult others. It
could kill safety in one rash, ill-conceived sentence.
BRIAN: I'd like to talk to you about your leadership style.
You micromanage me, and it's starting to drive me nuts.
FERNANDO: What? I ask you if you're going to be done on
time and you lay into me with . . .
If you start with your story (and in so doing, kill safety), you
may never actually get to the facts.
Begin your path with facts. In order to talk about your stories,
you need to lead the others involved down your Path to Action.
Let them experience your path from the beginning to the end,
and not from the end to-well, to wherever it takes you. Let oth­
ers see your experience from your point of view-starting with

=== Page 146 ===
128 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
your facts. This way, when you do talk about what you're start­
ing to conclude, they'll understand why. First the facts, then the
story-and then make sure that as you explain your story, you
tell it as a possible story, not as concrete fact.
BRIAN: Since I started work here, you've asked to meet with
me twice a day. That's more than with anyone else. You
have also asked me to pass all of my ideas by you before I
include them in a project. [The facts]
FERNANDO: What's your point?
BRIAN: I'm not sure that you're intending to send this mes­
sage, but I'm beginning to wonder if you don't trust me.
Maybe you think I'm not up to the job or that I'll get
you into trouble. Is that what's going on? [The possible
story]
FERNANDO: Really, I was merely trying to give you a chance
to get my input before you got too far down the path on a
project. The last guy I worked with was constantly taking
his project to near completion only to learn that he'd left
out a key element. I'm trying to avoid surprises.
Earn the right to share your story by starting with your facts.
Facts lay the groundwork for all delicate conversations.
leI! Your Story
Sharing your story can be tricky. Even if you've started with your
facts, the other person can still become defensive when you
move from facts to stories. After all, you're sharing potentially
unflattering conclusions and judgments.
Why share your story in the first place? Because the facts
alone are rarely worth mentioning. It's the facts plus the conclu­
sion that call for a face-to-face discussion. In addition, if you

=== Page 147 ===
STATE MY PATH 129
simply mention the facts, the other person may not understand
the severity of the implications. For example:
"I noticed that you had company software in your brief­
case."
"Yep, that's the beauty of software. It's portable."
"That particular software is proprietary."
"It ought to be! Our future depends on it."
"My understanding is that it's not supposed to go home."
"Of course not. That's how people steal it."
(Sounds like it's time for a conclusion.) "I was wondering what
the software is doing in your briefcase. It looks like you're tak­
ing it home. Is that what's going on here?"
It takes confidence. To be honest, it can be difficult to share
negative conclusions and unattractive judgments (e.g., "I'm
wondering if you're a thief"). It takes confidence to share such a
potentially inflammatory story. However, if you've done your
homework by thinking through the facts behind your story you'll
realize that you are drawing a reasonable, rational, and decent
conclusion. One that deserves hearing. And by starting with the
facts, you've laid the groundwork. By thinking through the facts
and then leading with them, you're much more likely to have the
confidence you need to add controversial and vitally important
meaning to the shared pool.
Don't pile it on. Sometimes we lack the confidence to speak
up, so we let problems simmer for a long time. Given the
chance, we generate a whole arsenal of unflattering conclu­
sions. For example, you're about to hold a crucial conversation
with your child's second-grade teacher. The teacher wants to
hold your daughter back a year. You want your daughter to
advance right along with her age group. This is what's going on
in your head:

=== Page 148 ===
130 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
"I can't believe this! This teacher is straight out of college,
and she wants to hold Debbie back. To be perfectly frank,
I don't think she gives much weight to the stigma of being
held back. Worse still, she's quoting the recommendation of
the school psychologist. The guy's a real idiot. I've met him,
and I wouldn't trust him with a common cold. I'm not
going to let these two morons push me around."
Which of these insulting conclusions or judgments should you
share? Certainly not the entire menagerie of unflattering tales. In
fact, you're going to need to work on this Villain Story before
you have any hope of healthy dialogue. As you do, your story
begins to sound more like this (note the careful choice of
terms-after all, it is your story, not the facts):
"When I first heard your recommendation, my initial reac­
tion was to oppose your decision. But after thinking about
it, I've realized I could be wrong. I realized I don't really
have any experience about what's best for Debbie in this
situation-only fears about the stigma of being held back.
I know it's a complex issue. I'd like to talk about how both
of us can more objectively weigh this decision."
Look for safety problems. As you share your story, watch for
signs that safety is deteriorating. If people start becoming defen­
sive or appear to be insulted, step out of the conversation and
rebuild safety by Contrasting.
Use Contrasting. Here's how it works:
"I know you care a great deal about my daughter, and I'm
confident you're well-trained. That's not my concern at all.
I know you want to do what's best for Debbie, and I do too.
My only issue is that this is an ambiguous decision with
huge implications for the rest of her life."

=== Page 149 ===
STATE MY PATH 131
Be careful not to apologize for your views. Remember, the
goal of Contrasting is not to water down your message, but to be
sure that people don't hear more than you intend. Be confident
enough to share what you really want to express.
Ask for Others' Paths
We mentioned that the key to sharing sensitive ideas is a blend
of confidence and humility. We express our confidence by shar­
ing our facts and stories clearly. We demonstrate our humility by
then asking others to share their views.
So once you've shared your point of view-facts and stories
alike-invite others to do the same. If your goal is to learn rather
than to be right, to make the best decision rather than to get your
way, then you'll be willing to hear other views. By being open to
learning we are demonstrating humility at its best.
For example, ask yourself: "What does the schoolteacher
think?" "Is your boss really intending to micromanage you?" "Is
your spouse really having an affair?"
To find out others' views on the matter, encourage them to
express their facts, stories, and feelings. Then carefully listen to
what they have to say. Equally important, be willing to abandon
or reshape your story as more information pours into the Pool of
Shared Meaning.
The "How" Skills
Ialk Tentatively
If you look back at the vignettes we've shared so far, you'll note
that we were careful to describe both facts and stories in a ten­
tative way. For example, "I was wondering why . . .
"
Talking tentatively simply means that we tell our story as a
story rather than disguising it as a fact. "Perhaps you were

=== Page 150 ===
132 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
unaware . . ." suggests that you're not absolutely certain. "In my
opinion . . ." says you're sharing an opinion and no more.
When sharing a story, strike a blend between confidence and
humility. Share in a way that expresses appropriate confidence in
your conclusions while demonstrating that, if appropriate, you
want your conclusions challenged. To do so, change "The fact is"
to "In my opinion." Swap "Everyone knows that" for "I've talked
to three of our suppliers who think that." Soften "It's clear to
me" to "I'm beginning to wonder if."
Why soften the message? Because we're trying to add mean­
ing to the pool, not force it down other people's throats. If we're
too forceful, the information won't make it into the pool.
Besides, with both facts and stories, we're not absolutely certain
they're true. Our observations could be faulty. Our stories­
well, they're only educated guesses.
In addition, when we use tentative language, not only does it
accurately portray our uncertain view, but it also helps reduce
defensiveness and makes it safe for others to offer differing opin­
ions. One of the ironies of dialogue is that when we're sharing
controversial ideas with potentially resistant people, the more
forceful we are, the less persuasive we are. In short, talking ten­
tatively can actually increase our influence.
Tentative, not wimpy. Some people are so worried about
being too forceful or pushy that they err in the other direction.
They wimp out by making still another Sucker's Choice. They
figure that the only safe way to share touchy data is to act as if
it's not important.
"I know this is probably not true . . ." or "Call me crazy
but . . ."
When you begin with a complete disclaimer and do it in a tone
that suggests you're consumed with doubt, you do the message a
disservice. It's one thing to be humble and open. It's quite another

=== Page 151 ===
STATE MY PATH 133
to be clinically uncertain. Use language that says you're sharing an
opinion, not language that says you're a nervous wreck.
A "Good" Story-The Goldilocks Test
To get a feel for how to best share your story, making sure that
you're neither too hard nor too soft, consider the following
examples:
Too soft: "This is probably stupid, but . . ."
Too hard: "How come you ripped us off?"
lust right: "It's starting to look like you're taking this home for
your own use. Is that right?"
Too soft: "I'm ashamed to even mention this, but . . ."
Too hard: "Just when did you start using hard drugs?"
Just right: "It's leading me to conclude that you're starting to use
drugs. Do you have another explanation that I'm missing
here?"
Too soft: "It's probably my fault, but . . ."
Too hard: "You wouldn't trust your own mother to make a one­
minute egg!"
Just right: "I'm starting to feel like you don't trust me. Is that
what's going on here? If so, I'd like to know what I did to
lose your trust."
Too soft: "Maybe I'm just oversexed or something, but . . ."
Too hard: "If you don't find a way to pick up the frequency, I'm
walking."
lust right: "I don't think you're intending this, but I'm beginning
to feci rejected."

=== Page 152 ===
134 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
fncourage Testing
When you ask others to share their paths, how you phrase your
invitation makes a big difference. Not only should you invite
others to talk, but you have to do so in a way that makes it clear
that no matter how controversial their ideas are, you want to
hear them. Others need to feel safe sharing their observations
and stories-even if they differ. Otherwise, they don't speak up
and you can't test the accuracy and relevance of your views.
This becomes particularly important when you're having a
crucial conversation with people who might move to silence.
Some people make Sucker's Choices in these circumstances.
They worry that if they share their true opinions, others will clam
up. So they choose between speaking their minds and hearing
others out. But the best at dialogue don't choose. They do both.
They understand that the only limit to how strongly you can
express your opinion is your willingness to be equally vigorous
in encouraging others to challenge it.
Invite opposing views. So if you think others may be hesitant,
make it clear that you want to hear their views-no matter their
opinion. If they disagree, so much the better. If what they have
to say is controversial or even touchy, respect them for finding
the courage to express what they're thinking. If they have differ­
ent facts or stories, you need to hear them to help complete the
picture. Make sure they have the opportunity to share by active­
ly inviting them to do so: "Does anyone see it differently?"
"What am I missing here?" "I'd really like to hear the other side
of this story."
Mean it. Sometimes people offer an invitation that sounds
more like a threat than a legitimate call for opinions. "Well,
that's how I see it. Nobody disagrees, do they?" Invite people
with both words and tone that say "I really want to hear from
you." For instance: "I know people have been reluctant to speak
up about this, but I would really love to hear from everyone."

=== Page 153 ===
STATE MY PATH 135
Or: "I know there are at least two sides to this story. Could we
hear differing views now? What problems could this decision
cause us?"
Play devil's advocate. Occasionally you can tell that others are
not buying into your facts or story, but they're not speaking up
either. You've sincerely invited them, even encouraged differing
views, but nobody says anything. To help grease the skids, play
devil's advocate. Model disagreeing by disagreeing with your
own view. "Maybe I'm wrong here. What if the opposite is true?
What if the reason sales have dropped is because . . ."
BACK TO THE MOTEL
To see how all of the STATE skills fit together in a touchy con­
versation, let's return to the motel bill. Only this time, Carole
does a far better job of bringing up a delicate issue.
BOB: Hi honey, how was your day?
CAROLE: Not so good.
BOB: Why's that?
CAROLE: I was checking our credit card bill, and I noticed a
charge of forty-eight dollars for the Good Night Motel
down the street. [Shares facts]
BOB: Boy, that sounds wrong.
CAROLE: It sure does.
BOB: Well, don't worry. I'll check into it one day when I'm
going by.
CAROLE: I'd feel better if we checked right now.
BOB: Really? It's less than fifty bucks. It can wait.
CAROLE: It's not the money that has me worried.
BOB: You're worried?

=== Page 154 ===
136 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
CAROLE: It's a motel down the street. You know that's how
my sister found out that Phil was having an affair. She
found a suspicious hotel bill. [Shares story-tentatively] I
don't have anything to worry about do I? What do you
think is going on with this bill? [Asks for other's path]
BOB: I don't know, but you certainly don't have to worry
about me.
CAROLE: I know that you've given me no reason to question
your fidelity. I don't really believe that you're having an
affair. [Contrasting] It's just that it might help put my
mind to rest if we were to check on this right now. Would
that bother you? [Encourages testing]
BOB: Not at all. Let's give them a call and find out what's
going on.
When this conversation actually did take place, it sounded
exactly like the one portrayed above. The suspicious spouse
avoided nasty accusations and ugly stories, shared facts, and
then tentatively shared a possible conclusion. As it turns out,
the couple had gone out to a Chinese restaurant earlier that
month. The owner of the restaurant also owned the motel and
used the same credit card imprinting machine at both estab­
lishments. Oops.
By tentatively sharing a story rather than attacking, name­
calling, and threatening, the worried spouse averted a huge bat­
tle, and the couple's relationship was strengthened at a time
when it could easily have been damaged.
STRONG BELIEF
Now let's turn our attention to another communication challenge.
This time you're not offering delicate feedback or iffy stories;
you're merely going to step into an argument and advocate your

=== Page 155 ===
STATE MY PATH 137
point of view. It's the kind of thing you do all the time. You do it
at home, you do it at work, and yes, you've even been known to
fire off an opinion or two while standing in line at the DMV.
Unfortunately, as stakes rise and others argue differing
views-and you just know in your heart of hearts that you're
right and they're wrong-you start pushing too hard. You simply
have to win. There's too much at risk and only you have the right
ideas. Left to their own devices, others will mess things up. So
when you care a great deal and are sure of your views, you don't
merely speak-you try to force your opinions on others. Quite
naturally, others resist. You in turn push even harder.
As consultants, we (the authors) watch this kind of thing hap­
pen all the time. For instance, seated around the table is a group
of leaders who are starting to debate an important topic. First,
someone hints that she's the only one with any real insight. Then
someone else starts tossing out facts like so many poisonous
darts. Another-it just so happens someone with critical infor­
mation-retreats into silence. As emotions rise, words that were
once carefully chosen and tentatively delivered are now spouted
with an absolute certainty that is typically reserved for claims
that are nailed to church doors or carved on stone tablets.
In the end, nobody is listening, everyone is committed to
silence or violence, and the Pool of Shared Meaning is dry.
Nobody wins.
How Did We Get like This?
It starts with a story. When we feel the need to push our ideas
on others, it's generally because we believe we're right and every­
one else is wrong. There's no need to expand the pool of mean­
ing. because we own the pool. We also firmly believe it's our duty
to fight for the truth that we're holding. It's the honorable thing
tu do. It's what people of l:haral:ter do.

=== Page 156 ===
138 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
Of course, others aren't exactly villains in this story. They sim­
ply don't know any better. We, on the other hand, are modern­
day heroes crusading against naivete and tunnel vision.
We feel justified in using dirty tricks. Once we're convinced
that it's our duty to fight for the truth, we start pulling out the
big guns. We use debating tricks that we've picked up through­
out the years. Chief among them is the ability to "stack the
deck." We cite information that supports our ideas while hiding
or discrediting anything that doesn't. Then we spice things up
with exaggeration: "Everyone knows that this is the only way to
go." When this doesn't work, we lace our language with inflam­
matory terms: "All right-thinking people would agree with me."
From there we employ any number of dirty tricks. We appeal
to authority: "Well, that's what the boss thinks." We attack the
person: "You're not so naive as to actually believe that?" We
draw hasty generalizations: "If it happened in our overseas oper­
ation, it'll happen here for sure."
And again, the harder we try and the more forceful our tac­
tics, the greater the resistance we create, the worse the results,
and the more battered our relationships.
How Do We Change?
The solution to excessive advocacy is actually rather simple-if
you can just bring yourself to do it. When you find yourself just
dying to convince others that your way is best, back off your cur­
rent attack and think about what you really want for yourself,
others, and the relationship. Then ask yourself, "How would I
behave if these were the results I really wanted?" When your
adrenaline level gets below the 0.05 legal limit, you'll be able to
use your STATE skills.
First, watch for the moment when people start to resist you.
Turn your attention from the topic (no matter how important) to

=== Page 157 ===
STATE MY PATH 139
yourself. Are you leaning forward? Are you speaking more
loudly? Are you starting to try to win? Are you speaking in
lengthy monologues and using dirty tricks? Remember: The
more you care about an issue, the less likely you are to be on
your best behavior.
Second, tone down your approach. Open yourself up to the
belief that others might have something to say, and better still,
they might even hold a piece of the puzzle-and then ask them
for their views.
Of course, this isn't easy. Backing off when we care the most
is so counterintuitive that most of us have trouble pulling it off.
It's not easy to soften your language when you're positive about
something. And who wants to ask for other views when you
know they're wrong? That's positively nuts.
In fact, it can feel disingenuous to be tentative when your own
strong belief is being brought into question. Of course, when you
watch others shift from healthy dialogue to forcing their way on
others, it's obvious that if they don't back off, nobody will buy
in. That's when you're watching others. On the other hand, when
we ourselves are pushing hard, it's the correct thing to do.
Right?
Let's face it. When it comes to our strongest views, passion
can be our enemy. Of course, feeling strongly about something
isn't bad in and of itself. It's okay to have strong opinions. The
problem comes when we try to express them.
For instance, when we believe strongly in a concept or a
cause, our emotions kick in and we start trying to force our way
onto others. As our emotions kick in, our ideas no longer flow
into the pool. Instead, our thoughts shoot out of our mouths like
water out of a raging fire hydrant. And guess what-others
become defensive. When this happens, when our emotions tum
our ideas into a harsh and painful stream of thoughts, our hon­
<.:st passion kills the argument rather than supports it.

=== Page 158 ===
140 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
Catch yourself. So what's a person to do? Catch yourself
before you launch into a monologue. Realize that if you're start­
ing to feel indignant or if you can't figure out why others don't
buy in-after all, it's so obvious to you-recognize that you're
starting to enter dangerous territory.
Back off your harsh and conclusive language, not your belief.
Hold to your belief; merely soften your approach.
SUMMARY-STATE MY PATH
When you have a tough message to share, or when you are so
convinced of your own rightness that you may push too hard,
remember to STATE your path:
• S.hare your facts. Start with the least controversial, most per­
suasive elements from your Path to Action.
• Tell your story. Explain what you're beginning to conclude.
• A.sk for others' paths. Encourage others to share both their
facts and their stories.
• Talk tentatively. State your story as a story-don't disguise it
as a fact.
• Encourage testing. Make it safe for others to express differing
or even opposing views.

=== Page 159 ===
8
One of the best ways to persuade others
is with your ears-by listening to them.
-DEAN RUSK
Explore Others'
Paths
How to Listen When Others
Blow Up or Clam Up
Over the past few months your daughter Wendy has started to
date a guy who looks like he's about ten minutes away from a
felony arrest. After only a few weeks of dating this fellow,
Wendy's clothing preference is now far too suggestive for your
taste, and she routinely punctuates her language with expletives.
When you carefully try to talk to her about these recent changes,
she shouts accusations and insults and then withdraws to her
room where she sulks for hours on end.
Now what? Should you do something given that you're not
the one going to silence or violence? When others clam up
(refusing to speak their minds) or blow up (communicating in a
way that is abusive and insulting), is there something you can do
tu get them to dialogue?

=== Page 160 ===
142 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
The answer is a resounding "It depends." If you want to let a
sleeping dog lie (or, in this case, a potential train wreck go unat­
tended), then say nothing. It's the other person who seems to
have something to say but refuses to open up. It's the other per­
son who's blown a cork. Run for cover. You can't take responsi­
bility for someone else's thoughts and feelings. Right?
Then again, you'll never work through your differences until
all parties freely add to the pool of meaning. That means the peo­
ple who are blowing up or clamming up must participate as well.
And while it's true that you can't force others to dialogue, you
can take steps to make it safer for them to do so. After all, that's
why they've sought the security of silence or violence in the first
place. They're afraid that dialogue will make them vulnerable.
Somehow they believe that if they engage in real conversation
with you, bad things will happen. Your daughter, for instance,
believes that if she talks with you, she'll be lectured, grounded,
and cut off from the only guy who seems to care about her.
Restoring safety is your greatest hope to get your relationship
back on track.
EXPLORE OTHERS' PATHS
In Chapter 5 we recommended that whenever you notice safety
is at risk, you should step out of the conversation and restore it.
When you have offended others through a thoughtless act, apol­
ogize. Or if someone has misunderstood your intent, use
Contrasting. Explain what you do and don't intend. Finally, if
you're simply at odds, find a Mutual Purpose.
Now we add one more skill: Explore Others' Paths. Since
we've added a model of what's going on inside another person's
head (the Path to Action), we now have a whole new tool for
helping others feel safe. If we can find a way to let others know
that it's okay to share their Path to Action-their facts, and yes,

=== Page 161 ===
EXPLORE OTHERS' PATHS 1 43
even their nasty stories and ugly feelings-then they'll be more
likely to open up.
But what does it take?
Start with Heart-Get Ready to listen
Be sincere. To get at others' facts and stories, we have to invite
them to share what's on their minds. We'll look at how to do this
in a minute. For now, let's highlight the point that when you do
invite people to share their views, you must mean it. For exam­
ple, consider the following incident. A patient is exiting a health­
care facility. The desk attendant can tell that she is a bit uneasy,
maybe even dissatisfied.
"Did everything go all right with the procedure?" the clerk asks.
"Mostly," the patient replies. (If ever there was a hint that
something was wrong, the term "mostly" has to be it.)
"Good," the clerk abruptly responds and then follows with a
resounding, "Next!"
This is a classic case of pretending to be interested. It falls under
the "How are you today?" category of inquiries. Meaning: "Please
don't say anything of substance. I'm really just making small talk."
When you ask people to open up, be prepared to listen.
Be curious. When you do want to hear from others (and you
should because it adds to the pool of meaning), the best way to get
at the truth is by making it safe for them to express the stories that
are moving them to either silence or violence. This means that at
the very moment when most people become furious, we need to
become curious. Rather than respond in kind, we need to wonder
what's behind the ruckus.
But how? How can we possibly act curious when others are
either attacking us or heading for cover? People who routinely
seek to find out why others are feeling unsafe have learned that
getting at the SOUl-ce or fear and discomfort is the best way to

=== Page 162 ===
144 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
return to dialogue. Either they've seen others do it, or they've
stumbled on the formula themselves. In either case, they realize
that the cure to silence or violence isn't to respond in kind, but
to get at the source. This calls for genuine curiosity-at a time
when you're likely to be feeling frustrated or angry.
To help turn your visceral tendency to respond in kind into
genuine curiosity, look for opportunities to be curious. Start with
a situation where you observe someone becoming emotional and
you're still under control-such as a meeting (when you're not
personally under attack and are less likely to get hooked). Do
your best to get at the person's source of fear or anger. Look for
chances to tum on your curiosity rather than kick-start your
adrenaline.
To illustrate what can happen as we exercise our curiosity, let's
return to our nervous patient.
CLERK: Did everything go all right with the procedure?
PATIENT: Mostly.
CLERK: It sounds like you had a problem of some kind. Is
that right?
PATIENT: I'll say. It hurt quite a bit. And besides, isn't the
doctor, like, uh, way too old?
In this case, the patient is reluctant to speak up. Perhaps if
she shares her honest opinion, she will insult the doctor, or
maybe the loyal staff members will become offended. To deal
with the problem, the desk attendant lets the patient know
that it's safe to talk (as much with his tone as with his words),
and she opens up.
Stay curious. When people begin to share their volatile stories
and feelings, we now face the risk of pulling out our own Victim,
Villain, and Helpless Stories to help us explain why they're say-

=== Page 163 ===
EXPLORE OTHERS' PATHS 145
ing what they're saying. Unfortunately, since it's rarely fun to
hear other people's unflattering stories, we begin to assign nega­
tive motives to them for telling the stories. For example:
CLERK: Well aren't you the ungrateful one! The kind doctor
devotes his whole life to helping people and now that he's
a little gray around the edges, you want to send him out
to pasture!
To avoid overreacting to others' stories, stay curious. Give
your brain a problem to stay focused on. Ask: "Why would a rea­
sonable, rational, and decent person say this?" This question
keeps you retracing the other person's Path to Action until you
see how it all fits together. And in most cases, you end up seeing
that under the circumstances, the individual in question drew a
fairly reasonable conclusion.
Be patient. When others are acting out their feelings and
opinions through silence or violence, it's a good bet they're
starting to feel the effects of adrenaline. Even if we do our best
to safely and effectively respond to the other person's possible
onslaught, we still have to face up to the fact that it's going to
take a little while for him or her to settle down. Say, for exam­
ple, that a friend dumps out an ugly story and you treat it with
respect and continue on with the conversation. Even if the two
of you now share a similar view, it may seem like your friend is
still pushing too hard. While it's natural to move quickly from
one thought to the next, strong emotions take a while to sub­
side. Once the chemicals that fuel emotions are released, they
hang around in the bloodstream for a time-in some cases, long
after thoughts have changed.
So be patient when exploring how others think and feel.
Encourage them to share their path and then wait for their emo­
tions to catch up with the safety that you've created.

=== Page 164 ===
146 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
Encourage Others to Retrace Their Path
Once you've decided to maintain a curious approach, it's time to
help the other person retrace his or her Path to Action.
Unfortunately, most of us fail to do so. That's because when oth­
ers start playing silence or violence games, we're joining the con­
versation at the end of their Path to Action. They've seen and
heard things, told themselves a story or two, generated a feeling
(possibly a mix of fear and anger or disappointment), and now
they're starting to act out their story. That's where we come in.
Now, even though we may be hearing their first words, we're
coming in somewhere near the end of their path. On the Path to
Action model, we're seeing the action at the end of the path-as
shown in Figure 8-1.
Every sentence has a history. To get a feel for how complicat­
ed and unnerving this process is, remember how you felt the last
time your favorite mystery show started late because a football
game ran long. As the game wraps up, the screen cross-fades
from a trio of announcers to a starlet standing over a murder vic­
tim. Along the bottom of the screen are the discomforting words,
"We now join this program already in progress."
&eel TeU a
Hear ---too- Story --...,... Fele
Figure 8-1. The Path to Action

=== Page 165 ===
EXPLORE OTHERS' PATHS 147
You shake the remote in exasperation. You've missed the
entire setup! For the rest of the program you end up guessing
about key facts. What happened before you joined in?
Crucial conversations can be equally mysterious and frustrat­
ing. When others are in either silence or violence, we're actually
joining their Path to Action already in progress. Consequently,
we've already missed the foundation of the story and we're con­
fused. If we're not careful, we can become defensive. After all,
not only are we joining late, but we're also joining at a time when
the other person is starting to act offensively.
Break the cycle. And then guess what happens? When we're on
the receiving end of someone's retributions, accusations, and cheap
shots, rarely do we think: "My, what an interesting story he or she
must have told. What do you suppose led to that?" Instead, we
match this unhealthy behavior. Our defense mechanisms kick in,
and we create our own hasty and ugly Path to Action.
People who know better cut this dangerous cycle by stepping
out of the interaction and making it safe for the other person to
talk about his or her Path to Action. They perform this feat by
encouraging him or her to move away from harsh feelings and
knee-jerk reactions and toward the root cause. In essence, they
retrace the other person's Path to Action together. At their
encouragement, the other person moves from his or her emo­
tions, to what he or she concluded, to what he or she observed.
When we help others retrace their path to its origins, not only
do we help curb our reaction, but we also return to the place
where the feelings can be resolved-at the source, or the facts
and the story behind the emotion.
POWER UP
When? So far we've suggested that when other people appear to
have a story to tell and facts to share, it's our job to invite them

=== Page 166 ===
148 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
to do so. Our cues are simple: Others are going to silence or vio­
lence. We can see that they're feeling upset, fearful, or angry. We
can see that if we don't get at the source of their feelings, we'll
end up suffering the effects of the feelings. These external reac­
tions are our cues to do whatever it takes to help others retrace
their Paths to Action.
How? We've also suggested that whatever we do to invite the
other person to open up and share his or her path, our invitation
must be sincere. As hard as it sounds, we must be sincere in the
face of hostility, fear, or even abuse-which leads us to the next
question.
What? What are we supposed to actually do? What does it
take to get others to share their path-stories and facts alike? In
a word, it requires listening. In order for people to move from
acting on their feelings to talking about their conclusions and
observations, we must listen in a way that makes it safe for oth­
ers to share their intimate thoughts. They must believe that when
they share their thoughts, they won't offend others or be pun­
ished for speaking frankly.
AMPP
To encourage others to share their paths we'll use four power lis­
tening tools that can help make it safe for other people to speak
frankly. We call the four skills power listening tools because they
are best remembered with the acronym AMPP-Ask, Mirror,
Paraphrase, and Prime. Luckily, the tools work for both silence
and violence games.
Ask to Get Things Rolling
The easiest and most straightforward way to encourage others to
share their Path to Action is simply to invite them to express them­
selves. For example, often all it takes to break an impasse is to seek

=== Page 167 ===
EXPLORE OTHERS' PATHS 149
to understand others' views. When we show genuine interest, peo­
ple feel less compelled to use silence or violence. For example: "Do
you like my new dress, or are you going to call the modesty
police?" Wendy smirks.
"What do you mean?" you ask. "I'd like to hear your concerns."
If you're willing to step out of the fray and simply invite the
other person to talk about what's really going on, it can go a long
way toward breaking the downward spiral and getting to the
source of the problem.
Common invitations include:
"What's going on?"
"I'd really like to hear your opinion on this."
"Please let me know if you see it differently."
"Don't worry about hurting my feelings. I really want to
hear your thoughts."
Mirror to Confirm Feelings
If asking others to share their path doesn't open things up, mirror­
ing can help build more safety. In mirroring, we take the portion of
the other person's Path to Action we have access to and make it
safe for him or her to discuss it. All we have so far are actions and
some hints about the other person's emotions, so we start there.
When we mirror, as the name suggests, we hold a mirror up
to the other person-describing how they look or act. Although
we may not understand others' stories or facts, we can see their
actions and get clues about their feelings.
This particular tool is most useful when another person's tone
or voice or gestures (hints about the emotions behind them) are
inconsistent with his or her words. For example: "Don't worry.
I'm fine." (But the person in question is saying this with a look
t hat suggests he is actually quite upset. He's frowning, looking
around, and sort of kicking at the ground.)

=== Page 168 ===
1 50 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
"Really? From the way you're saying that, it doesn't sound like
you are."
We explain that while the person may be saying one thing, his
or her tone of voice or body posture suggests something else. In
doing so, we show respect and concern for him or her.
The most important element of mirroring is our tone of voice.
It is not the fact that we are acknowledging others' emotions that
creates safety. We create safety when our tone of voice says we're
okay with them feeling the way they're feeling. If we do this well,
they may conclude that rather than acting out their emotions,
they can confidently talk them out with us instead.
So as we describe what we see, we have to do so calmly. If we
act upset or as if we're not going to like what others say, we don't
build safety. We confirm their suspicions that they need to
remain silent.
Examples of mirroring include:
"You say you're okay, but by the tone of your voice, you
seem upset."
"You seem angry at me."
"You look nervous about confronting him. Are you sure
you're willing to do it?"
�araphrase to Acknowledge the Story
Asking and mirroring may help you get part of the other person's
story out into the open. When you get a clue about why the per­
son is feeling as he or she does, you can build additional safety
by paraphrasing what you've heard. Be careful not to simply par­
rot back what was said. Instead, put the message in your own
words-usually in an abbreviated form.
"Let's see if I've got this right. You're upset because I've
voiced my concern about some of the clothes you wear. And
this seems controlling or old-fashioned to you."

=== Page 169 ===
EXPLORE OTHERS' PATHS 1 51
The key to paraphrasing, as with mirroring, is to remain calm
and collected. Our goal is to make it safe, not to act horrified and
suggest that the conversation is about to tum ugly. Stay focused
on figuring out how a reasonable, rational, and decent person
could have created this Path to Action. This will help you keep
from becoming angry or defensive. Simply rephrase what the per­
son has said, and do it in a way that suggests that it's okay, you're
trying to understand, and it's safe for him or her to talk candidly.
Don't push too hard. Let's see where we are. We can tell that
another person has more to share than he or she is currently
sharing. He or she is going to silence or violence, and we want
to know why. We want to get back to the source (the facts)
where we can solve the problem. To encourage the person to
share, we've tried three listening tools. We've asked, mirrored,
and paraphrased. The person is still upset, but isn't explaining
his or her stories or facts.
Now what? At this point, we may want to back off. After a
while, our attempts to make it safe for others can start feeling as
if we're pestering or prying. If we push too hard, we violate both
purpose and respect. Others may think our purpose is merely to
extract what we want from them and conclude that we don't care
about them personally. So instead, we back off. Rather than try­
ing to get to the source of the other person's emotions, we either
gracefully exit or ask what he or she wants to see happen. Asking
people what they want helps them engage their brains in a way
that moves to problem solving and away from either attacking or
avoiding. It also helps reveal what they think the cause of the
problem is.
frime When You're Getting Nowhere
On the other hand, there are times when you may conclude that
others would like to open up but still don't feel safe. Or maybe
they're still in violence, haven't come down from the adrenaline,

=== Page 170 ===
152 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
and aren't explaining why they're angry. When this is the case,
you might want to try priming. Prime when you believe that the
other person still has something to share and might do so with a
little more effort on your part.
The power-listening term priming comes from the expression
"priming the pump." If you've ever worked an old-fashioned
hand pump, you understand the metaphor. With a pump, you
often have to pour some water into it to get it running. Then it
works just fine. When it comes to power listening, sometimes
you have to offer your best guess at what the other person is
thinking or feeling. You have to pour some meaning into the
pool before the other person will do the same.
A few years back, one of the authors was working with an
executive team that had decided to add an afternoon shift to one
of the company's work areas. The machinery wasn't being fully
utilized, and the company couldn't afford to keep the area open
without adding a three-to-midnight crew. This, of course, meant
that the people currently working days would now have to rotate
every two weeks to afternoons. It was a tortured but necessary
choice.
As the execs held a meeting to announce the unpopular
change, the existing work crew went silent. They were obviously
unhappy, but nobody would say anything. The operations man­
ager was afraid that people would misinterpret the company's
actions as nothing more than a grab for more money. In truth,
the area was losing money, but the decision was made with the
current employees in mind. With no second shift, there would be
no jobs. He also knew that asking people to rotate shifts and to
be away from loved ones during the afternoon and evening
would cause horrible burdens.
As people sat silently fuming, the executive did his best to get
them to talk so that they wouldn't walk away with unresolved
feelings. He mirrored, "I can see you're upset-who wouldn't

=== Page 171 ===
EXPLORE OTHERS' PATHS 1 53
be? Is there anything we can do?" Nothing. Finally, he primed.
That is, he took his best guess at what they might be thinking,
said it in a way that showed it was okay to talk about it, and then
went on from there. "Are you thinking that the only reason we're
doing this is to make money? That maybe we don't care about
your personal lives?"
After a brief pause, someone answered: "Well, it sure looks
like that. Do you have any idea how much trouble this is going
to cause?" Then someone else chimed in and the discussion was
off and running.
Now, this is not the kind of thing you would do unless noth­
ing else has worked. You really want to hear from others, and
you have a very strong idea of what they're probably thinking.
Priming is an act of good faith, taking risks, becoming vulnera­
ble, and building safety in hopes that others will share their
meaning.
But What If They're Wrong?
Sometimes it feels dangerous to sincerely explore the views of
someone whose path is wildly different from your own. He or
she could be completely wrong, and we're acting calm and col­
lected. This makes us nervous.
To keep ourselves from feeling nervous while exploring others'
paths-no matter how different or wrong they seem-remember
we're trying to understand their point of view, not necessarily
agree with it or support it. Understanding doesn't equate with
agreement. By coming to understand another person's Path to
Action, we are not accepting it as absolute truth. There will be
plenty of time later for us to share our path as well. For now,
wc're merely trying to get at what others think in order to under­
stand why they're feeling the way they're feeling and doing what
they'rc doing.

=== Page 172 ===
1 54 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
EXPLORING WENDY'S PATH
Now let's put the several skills together in a single interaction. We'll
return to Wendy. She has just come home from a date with the guy
who has you frightened. You yank the door open, pull Wendy into
the house, and double-bolt your entrance. Then you talk, sort of.
WENDY: How could you embarrass me like that! 1 get one
boy to like me, and now he'll never talk to me again! 1
hate you!
You: That wasn't a boy. That was a future inmate. You're
worth more than that. Why are you wasting your time
with him?
WENDY: You're ruining my life. Leave me alone!
After Wendy's bedroom door slams shut, you drop down
into a chair in the living room. Your emotions are running
wild. You're terrified about what could happen if Wendy con­
tinues to see this guy. You're hurt that she said she hated you.
You feel that your relationship with her is spiraling out of
control.
So you ask yourself, "What do 1 really want?" As you mull this
question over, your motives change. The goals of controlling
Wendy and defending your pride drop from the top to the bottom
of your list. The goal that's now at the top looks a bit more inspir­
ing: "I want to understand what she's feeling. 1 want a good rela­
tionship with Wendy. And I want her to make choices that will
make her happy."
You're not sure if tonight is the best or worst time to talk, but you
know that talking is the only path forward. So you give it a shot.
You: (Tapping on door.) Wendy? May I talk with you
please?
WENDY: Whatever.

=== Page 173 ===
EXPLORE OTHERS' PATHS 1 55
(You enter her room and sit on her bed.)
YOU: I'm really sorry for embarrassing you like that. That
was a bad way to handle it. [Apologize to build safety]
WENDY: It's just that you do that a lot. It's like you want to
control everything in my life.
YOU: Can we talk about that? [Ask]
WENDY: (Sounding angry) It's no big deal. You're the par­
ent, right?
YOU: From the way you say that, it sounds like it is a big
deal. [Mirror] I really would like to hear what makes you
think I'm trying to control your life. [Ask]
WENDY: What, so you can tell me more ways that I'm
screwed up? I've finally got one friend who accepts me,
and you're trying to chase him away!
YOU: So you feel like I don't approve of you, and your friend
is one person who does? [Paraphrase]
WENDY: It's not just you. All my friends have lots of boys
who like them. Doug's the first guy who's even called me.
I don't know-never mind.
YOU: I can see how you'd feel badly when others are getting
attention from boys and you aren't. I'd probably feel the
same way. [Paraphrase]
WENDY: Then how could you embarrass me like that?!
YOU: Honey, I'd like to take a stab at something here. I won­
der if part of the reason you've started dressing differently
and hanging out with different friends is because you're
not feeling cared about and valued by boys, by your par­
ents, and by others right now. Is that part of it? [Prime]
WENDY: (Sits quietly for a long time) Why am I so ugly? I
really work on how I look but . . .

=== Page 174 ===
156 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
From here, the conversation goes to the real issues, parent and
daughter discuss what's really going on, and both come to a better
understanding of each other.
REMEMBER YOUR ABCs
Let's say you did your level best to make it safe for the other per­
son to talk. After asking, mirroring, paraphrasing, and eventually
priming, the other person opened up and shared his or her path.
It's now your turn to talk. But what if you disagree? Some of the
other person's facts are wrong, and his or her stories are com­
pletely fouled up. Well, at least they're a lot different from the
story you've been telling. Now what?
Agree
As you watch families and work groups take part in heated
debates, it's common to notice a rather intriguing phenomenon.
Although the various parties you're observing are violently argu­
ing, in truth, they're in violent agreement. They actually agree on
every important point, but they're still fighting. They've found a
way to turn subtle differences into a raging debate.
For example, last night your teenage son broke his curfew
again. You and your spouse have spent the morning arguing
about the infraction. Last time James came in late, you agreed to
ground him, but today you're upset because it seems like your
spouse is backpedaling by suggesting that James still be able to
attend a football camp this week. Turns out it was just a misun­
derstanding. You and your spouse agree to the grounding-the
central issue. You thought your spouse was reneging on the agree­
ment when, in truth, you just hadn't actually resolved the date the
grounding would start. You had to step back and listen to what

=== Page 175 ===
EXPLORE OTHERS' PATHS 157
you were both saying to realize that you weren't really disagree­
ing, but violently agreeing.
Most arguments consist of battles over the 5 to 10 percent of
the facts and stories that people disagree over. And while it's true
that people eventually need to work through differences, you
shouldn't start there. Start with an area of agreement.
So here's the take-away. If you completely agree with the
other person's path, say so and move on. Agree when you agree.
Don't turn an agreement into an argument.
Ruild
Of course, the reason most of us turn agreements into debates is
because we disagree with a certain portion of what the other per­
son has said. Never mind that it's a minor portion. If it's a point
of disagreement, we'll jump all over it like a fleeing criminal.
Actually, we're trained to look for minor errors from an early
age. For instance, we learn in kindergarten that if you have the
right answer, you're the teacher's pet. Being right is good. Of
course, if others have the right answer they get to be the pet. So
being right first is even better. You learn to look for even the tini­
est of errors in others' facts, thinking, or logic. Then you point
out the errors. Being right at the expense of others is best.
By the time you finish your education, you have a virtual
Ph.D. in catching trivial differences and turning them into a
major deal. So when another person offers up a suggestion
(based on facts and stories), you're looking to disagree. And
when you do find a minor difference, you turn this snack into a
meal. Instead of remaining in healthy dialogue, you end up in
violent agreement.
On the other hand, when you watch people who are skilled in
dialogue, it becomes clear that they're not playing this everyday

=== Page 176 ===
158 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
game of Trivial Pursuit-looking for trivial differences and then
proclaiming them aloud. In fact, they're looking for points of
agreement. As a result, they'll often start with the words "I
agree." Then they talk about the part they agree with. At least,
that's where they start.
Now when the other person has merely left out an element of
the argument, skilled people will agree and then build. Rather
than saying: "Wrong. You forgot to mention . . .," they say:
"Absolutely. In addition, I noticed that . . ."
If you agree with what has been said but the information is
incomplete, build. Point out areas of agreement and then add
elements that were left out of the discussion .
.compare
Finally, if you do disagree, compare your path with the other
person's. That is, rather than suggesting that he or she is
wrong, suggest that you differ. He or she may, in fact, be
wrong, but you don't know for sure until you hear both sides
of the story. For now, you just know that the two of you differ.
So instead of pronouncing "Wrong!" start with a tentative but
candid opening such as "I think I see things differently. Let me
describe how."
Then share your path using the STATE skills from Chapter 7.
That is, begin by sharing your observations. Share them tenta­
tively, and invite others to test your ideas. After you've shared
your path, invite the other person to help you compare it with
his or her experience. Work together to explore and explain the
differences.
In summary, to help remember these skills, think of your
ABCs. Agree when you agree. Build when others leave out key
pieces. Compare when you differ. Don't tum differences into
debates that lead to unhealthy relationships and bad results.

=== Page 177 ===
EXPLORE OTHERS' PATHS 159
SUMMARY-EXPLORE OTHERS' PATHS
To encourage the free flow of meaning and help others leave
silence or violence behind, explore their Paths to Action. Start
with an attitude of curiosity and patience. This helps restore
safety.
Then, use four powerful listening skills to retrace the other
person's Path to Action to its origins.
• Ask. Start by simply expressing interest in the other person's
views.
• Mirror. Increase safety by respectfully acknowledging the
emotions people appear to be feeling.
• l!.araphrase. As others begin to share part of their story,
restate what you've heard to show not just that you under­
stand, but also that it's safe for them to share what they're
thinking.
• Prime. If others continue to hold back, prime. Take your best
guess at what they may be thinking and feeling.
As you begin to share your views, remember:
• Agree. Agree when you do.
• Build. If others leave something out, agree where you do,
then build.
• Qompare. When you do differ significantly, don't suggest others
are wrong. Compare your two views.

=== Page 179 ===
To do nothmg m every man's power.
IS
-SAMUl\L JOHNSON
Move to Action
How to Turn Crucial
Conversations into
Action and Results
Up until this point we've suggested that getting more meaning
into the pool helps with dialogue. It's the one thing that helps
people make savvy decisions that, in turn, lead to smart actions.
In order to encourage this free flow of meaning, we've shared the
skills we've been able to learn by watching people who are gift­
ed at dialogue. By now, if you've followed some or all of this
advice, you're walking around with full pools. People who walk
near you should hear the sloshing.
It's time we add two final skills. Having more meaning in the
pool. even jointly owning it, doesn't guarantee that we all agree
on what we're going to do with the meaning. For example, when
Il!ums or families meet and generate a host of ideas, they often
fail to convert the ideas into action for two reasons:

=== Page 180 ===
162 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
• They have unclear expectations about how decisions will be
made.
• They do a poor job of acting on the decisions they do make.
This can be dangerous. In fact, when people move from adding
meaning to the pool to moving to action, it's a prime time for new
challenges to arise. Who is supposed to take the assignment?
That can be controversial. How are we supposed to decide in the
first place? That can be emotional. Let's take a look at what it
takes to solve each of these problems. First, making decisions.
DIALOGUE IS NOT DECISION MAKING
The two riskiest times in crucial conversations tend to be at the
beginning and at the end. The beginning is risky because you
have to find a way to create safety or else things go awry. The end
is dicey because if you aren't careful about how you clarify the
conclusion and decisions flowing from your Pool of Shared
Meaning, you can run into violated expectations later on. This
can happen in two ways.
How are decisions going to be made? First, people may not
understand how decisions are going to be made. For example,
Cara is miffed. Rene just plunked down a brochure for a three­
day cruise and announced he had made reservations and even
paid the five hundred dollar deposit for an outside suite.
A week ago they had a crucial conversation about vacation
plans. Both expressed their views and preferences respectfully
and candidly. It wasn't easy, but at the end they concluded a
cruise suited both quite well. And yet Cara is miffed, and Rene
is stunned that Cara is anything less than ecstatic.
Cara agreed in principle about a cruise. She didn't agree with
this particular cruise. Rene thought that any cruise would be fine
and made a decision on his own. Have fun on the cruise. Rene.

=== Page 181 ===
MOVE TO ACTION 163
Are we ever going to decide? The second problem with deci­
sion making occurs when no decision gets made. Either ideas
slip away and dissipate, or people can't figure out what to do
with them. Or maybe everyone is waiting for everyone else to
make the decisions. "Hey, we filled the pool. Now you do some­
thing with it." In any case, decisions drag on forever.
DECIDE HOW TO DECIDE
Both of these problems are solved if, before making a decision,
the people involved decide how to decide. Don't allow people to
assume that dialogue is decision making. Dialogue is a process
for getting all relevant meaning into a shared pool. That process,
of course, involves everyone. However, simply because everyone
is allowed to share their meaning-actually encouraged to share
their meaning-doesn't mean they are then guaranteed to take
part in making all the decisions. To avoid violated expectations,
separate dialogue from decision making. Make it clear how deci­
sions will be made-who will be involved and why.
When the line of authority is clear. When you're in a position
of authority, you decide which method of decision making you'll
use. Managers and parents, for example, decide how to decide. It's
part of their responsibility as leaders. For instance, VPs don't ask
hourly employees to decide on pricing changes or product lines.
That's the leaders' job. Parents don't ask small children to pick
their home security device or to set their own curfew. That's the
job of the parent. Of course, both leaders and parents tum more
decisions over to their direct reports and children when they war­
rant the responsibility, but it's still the authority figure who decides
what method of decision making to employ. Deciding what deci­
sions to tum over and when to do it is part of their stewardship.
When the line of authority isn't clear. When there is no clear
line of authority, deciding how to decide can be quite difficult.

=== Page 182 ===
164 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
For instance, consider a conversation we referred to earlier-the
one you had with your daughter's schoolteacher. Should you hold
your child back? Whose choice is this anyway? Who decides
whose choice it is? Does everyone have a say, then a vote? Is it
the school officials' responsibility, so they choose? Since parents
have ultimate responsibility, should they consult with the appro­
priate experts and then decide? Is there even a clear answer to
this tough question?
A case like this is hand-tooled for dialogue. All of the partici­
pants need to get their meaning into the pool-including their
opinions about who should make the final choice. That's part of
the meaning you need to discuss. If you don't openly talk about
who decides and why, and your opinions vary widely, you're like­
ly to end up in a heated battle that can only be resolved in court.
Handled poorly, that's exactly where these kind of issues are
resolved-The lo nes Family vs. Happy Valley School District.
So what's a person to do? Talk openly about your child's abil­
ities and interests as well as about how the final choice will be
made. Don't mention lawyers or a lawsuit in your opening com­
ments; this only reduces safety and sets up an adversarial cli­
mate. Your goal is to have an open, honest, and healthy discus­
sion about a child, not to exert your influence, make threats, or
somehow beat the educators. Stick with the opinions of the
experts at hand, and discuss how and why they should be
involved. When decision-making authority is unclear, use your
best dialogue skills to get meaning into the pool. Jointly decide
how to decide.
The Four Methods of Decision Making
When you're deciding how to decide, it helps to have a way of
talking about the decision-making options available. There are
four common ways of making decisions: command, consult,

=== Page 183 ===
MOVE TO ACTION 165
vote, and consensus. These four options represent increasing
degrees of involvement. Increased involvement, of course, brings
the benefit of increased commitment along with the curse of
decreased decision-making efficiency. Savvy people choose from
among these four methods of decision making the one that best
suits their particular circumstances.
Command
Let's start with decisions that are made with no involvement what­
soever. This happens in one of two ways. Either outside forces
place demands on us (demands that leave us no wiggle room), or
we tum decisions over to others and then follow their lead. We
don't care enough to be involved-let someone else do the work.
In the case of external forces, customers set prices, agencies
mandate safety standards, and other governing bodies simply
hand us demands. As much as employees like to think their boss­
es are sitting around making choices, for the most part they're
simply passing on the demands of the circumstances. These are
command decisions. With command decisions, it's not our job to
decide what to do. It's our job to decide how to make it work.
In the case of turning decisions over to others, we decide
either that this is such a low-stakes issue that we don't care
enough to take part or that we completely trust the ability of the
delegate to make the right decision. More involvement adds
nothing. In strong teams and great relationships, many decisions
are made by turning the final choice over to someone we trust to
make a good decision. We don't want to take the time ourselves
and gladly tum the decision over to others.
Consult
Consulting is a process whereby decision makers invite others to
influenec them before they make their choice. You can consult

=== Page 184 ===
166 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
with experts, a representative population, or even everyone who
wants to offer an opinion. Consulting can be an efficient way of
gaining ideas and support without bogging down the decision­
making process. At least not too much. Wise leaders, parents,
and even couples frequently make decisions in this way. They
gather ideas, evaluate options, make a choice, and then inform
the broader population.
Vote
Voting is best suited to situations where efficiency is the highest
value-and you're selecting from a number of good options.
Members of the team realize they may not get their first choice,
but frankly they don't want to waste time talking the issue to
death. They may discuss options for a while and then call for a
vote. When facing several decent options, voting is a great time
saver but should never be used when team members don't agree
to support whatever decision is made. In these cases, consensus
is required.
Consensus
This method can be both a great blessing and a frustrating curse.
Consensus means you talk until everyone honestly agrees to one
decision. This method can produce tremendous unity and high­
quality decisions. If misapplied, it can also be a horrible waste of
time. It should only be used with (1) high-stakes and complex
issues or (2) issues where everyone absolutely must support the
final choice.
HOW TO CHOOSE
Now that we know the four methods, let's explore which method
to use at which time-along with some hints about how to avoid
common blunders.

=== Page 185 ===
MOVE TO ACTION 167
Four Important Questions
When choosing among the four methods of decision making,
consider the following questions.
1. Who cares? Determine who genuinely wants to be involved
in the decision along with those who will be affected. These
are your candidates for involvement. Don't involve people
who don't care.
2. Who knows? Identify who has the expertise you need to
make the best decision. Encourage these people to take
part. Try not to involve people who contribute no new
information.
3. Who must agree? Think of those whose cooperation you
might need in the form of authority or influence in any
decisions you might make. It's better to involve these
people than to surprise them and then suffer their open
resistance.
4. How many people is it worth involving? Your goal should
be to involve the fewest number of people while still con­
sidering the quality of the decision along with the support
that people will give it. Ask: "Do we have enough people to
make a good choice? Will others have to be involved to
gain their commitment?"
How about you? Here's a suggestion for a great exercise for
teams or couples, particularly those that are frustrated about
decision making. Make a list of some of the important decisions
made in the team or relationship. Then discuss how each deci­
sion is currently made, and how each should be made-using the
four important questions. After discussing each decision, decide
how you will make decisions in the future. A crucial conversa­
tion about your decision
-
making practices can resolve many frus­
Iruling issues.

=== Page 186 ===
168 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
DECISION-MAKING BLUNDERS AND SOLUTIONS
Now, let's look at each of the four methods in turn. What are the
common blunders associated with each, and more importantly,
how can we avoid them?
Appropriate Use of Command
The mistake. For years, employees have complained that their
bosses are far too bossy. They hand out orders like Halloween
candy. They not only tell people what to do, but also restrict
them to only one way of doing it. They give directions down to
the tiniest detail when it would be better to allow the employee
to work out the details of how the job will be done. After all, the
employee is not only closest to the job, but is also the expert on
how to do it.
Today's generation of employees (and children, for that mat­
ter) expects to be involved in more decisions than their grand­
parents ever faced. That's where the empowerment movement
came from. Younger people don't see themselves as a pair of
hands seeking direction. They want to think. They want to
decide. They're willing to take on more responsibility.
So as you face a potential "command decision," consider the
following:
• Don't pass out orders like candy. We face enough command
decisions (constraints placed on us by outside forces) without
making up new ones. As a general rule, if people can make choic­
es, allow them to do so. Don't tie their hands without reason.
With kids, for example, you may establish rules about cleanliness
in the common areas of the home, but you may let them choose
(within the boundaries of hygiene) how to keep their rooms.
When you face a command decision, ask which elements are
•
flexible. Once a standard has been set by an agency or an order

=== Page 187 ===
MOVE TO ACTION 169
placed by a customer, while you may not be able to decide what
to work on or what standards to follow, you can decide how to
work. Find out where you do have degrees of freedom and then
allow others to choose within these boundaries .
• Explain why. When handing down an order, explain the reason
behind the demand. Knowing why helps make what a lot eas­
ier. For example, if you decide overtime is needed to meet a
deadline, it helps to explain why you came to this conclusion.
The Dos and Don'ts of Consultation
The most obvious problem with consultation is that people
believe that if you involve them in sharing ideas, they get to make
the decision. It's easy to see how this happens since you ask for
people's input, you weigh all the options, and you make a deci­
sion. Then two-thirds of those you asked feel violated because
you didn't do what they told you to do.
Dialogue is a great tool for consultation. It enables you to get
all meaning into the shared pool. But before people start con­
tributing, be sure they understand that the fact that you are con­
sulting with them does not mean that eventually the decision will
be made by consensus.
When should you use consultation? Consult when (1) many
people will be affected, (2) you can gather information relative­
Iy easily, (3) people care about the decision, and (4) there are
many options, some of them controversial.
When these conditions apply, find a way to touch base with a
lot of people in different positions, locations, and functions
before moving on. Don't simply call on your friends and buddies.
Also, consider the following:
• J)on', pretend to consult. If you've already made up your
mind, don't go through the charade of involving people, only

=== Page 188 ===
170 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
to do what you wanted to do all along. For example, the boss
calls on people and then strikes down ideas that aren't in line
with what he or she has in mind, while giving subtle clues and
gentle rewards to those who stumble onto the "right idea."
• Announce what you're doing. When you are only going to
involve a sample of the people who will be affected, let others
know who these people are so they can talk to them if they
like. This is akin to holding neighborhood political meetings.
Not everyone will show up, but people who want to take part
can take part.
• Report your decision. When others are kind enough to share
their opinions (whether you take their advice or not), they
deserve to know what you decide and why. Don't try to keep
your decision a secret because you're afraid you'll offend peo­
ple. They'll soon learn of the decision anyway. Better to hear
it from you and not through the grapevine.
Holding a Good Vote
• Weigh the consequences. Voting by its very nature creates
winners and losers. So you have to be careful. You should only
take a vote when you know that the losers don't really care all
that much. Otherwise you may be fighting the battle for a long
time after the decision has been made. With children, for
example, have them carefully consider if they're okay with los­
ing before they agree to have you take a poll.
• Know when to vote. When matters aren't all that weighty, there
are many good choices to select from, and people care about
not taking too much time, then take a vote. It's the kind of thing
you do to reduce lengthy lists. Vote to reduce the list of twenty
items to five. Then use consensus to select from the five.

=== Page 189 ===
MOVE TO ACTION 171
• Don't cop out with a vote. When everyone cares a great deal
about an issue and people are having trouble coming to a
choice, don't stop and call for a vote. Votes should never replace
patient analysis and healthy dialogue. If you find yourself say­
ing, "All right, we'll never agree so let's vote," you're copping
out.
Surviving the Joys of Consensus
Imagine you're working with six people, all housed in a tight
space. Things are sailing along smoothly until one day when a
new employee shows up with a huge boom box-it looks like a
storage shed with a handle on top. It has its own set of wheels.
Thirty seconds later, the pulsing sounds of a band called Decibel
Death fill your area. You're not happy. You fear your head will
explode. How might you handle this?
Or how about this challenge? How do you decide the temper­
ature of the room you share?
Or how about this one? Where does the entire family go on
vacation?
Or if you want to take on a real corker-who performs the
most distasteful jobs at home and at work?
These are the kinds of decisions where neither consultation nor
command tools work very well. Everyone is affected, everyone
cares, and there are several options-not equally liked. This kind
of crucial conversation calls for consensus. Everyone meets, hon­
estly and openly discusses the choices, comes up with a variety of
ideas, and jointly makes a decision that each person agrees to sup­
port. As is the case with all crucial conversations, this is not an
easy process and is routinely handled poorly. Here are some hints
for avoiding common mistakes .
• Don't force consensus onto everything. As Abraham Maslow
once said, "If the only tool you have is a hammer, you tend to

=== Page 190 ===
172 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
see every problem as a nail." Consensus decision making is
one of today's widely used hammers. People apply it to situa­
tions that don't deserve the time and attention needed to come
to a consensus or that can't be solved unanimously.
For example, forty people are brought together to decide on
the color of the work area. That's too many people. Use con­
sultation. A team meets to decide if each team member should
use a certain type of coffee mug (we're not making this up).
Let people choose their own. A couple asks their son to decide
his own punishment. Not always a good idea. Some decisions
need to be made by command.
• Don't pretend that everyone gets his or her first choice. Nobody
ever said that with consensus everyone gets his or her way.
Consensus isn't about getting your way; it's about doing what's
best for the family or team. It requires give and take. It demands
compromise followed by the resolve to support (in some cases)
your second or third choice-because it's best for the group.
• No martyrs please. Healthy teams and families are good at
coming to consensus because they're good at dialogue. They
don't toggle from silence to violence or otherwise play games
in order to get their way. Since everyone has a say and says it
well, healthy groups don't end up with the same people con­
stantly giving in and then playing the role of martyr. "Are you
enjoying the theme park? Don't worry about me. I'll just sit
here on the curb and try to think of what it would have been
like to go to Paris."
• Don't take turns. Decisions should be based on merit, not on
who offers up the options. Don't take turns getting your way.
"Well, Leona, my recollection is that you gave in last time, so
I guess it's our turn to roll over on this one." Make the deci­
sion based on which proposal best meets the needs of the

=== Page 191 ===
MOVE TO ACTION 173
group. This doesn't mean that people don't take into account
personalities or strength of desire (deferring to those who care
a great deal when you don't care all that much, for instance).
It simply means that the future of your family or organization
shouldn't come down to the flip of a coin.
• Don't engage in postdecision lobbying. Consensus decisions
should be made out in the open and as an entire group.
Withholding your reservations and then approaching individu­
als after the discussion is both inefficient and disloyal. If you
have an issue, bring it up in front of the group. Leave unhealthy
alliances, dirty deals, and secret discussions to people who are
on reality game shows. They can afford to abuse one another,
take their winnings, and then go their separate ways. With fam­
ilies and work groups, you stay together long after the ugly
behavior and you suffer the long-term consequences .
• Don't say «[ told you so." Nothing is quite so annoying as
having someone agree on a choice (his or her second choice,
perhaps) and then cry, "I told you so!" when it doesn't work
out. Once you've decided on something as a group, support
the idea-not even when it fails, but particularly when it fails.
There's no room for fair-weather family members or team­
mates. Show character. When an idea doesn't work out, own
the failure together.
Advice for the Time-Bound
There are times when you know you should involve others in a
decision, but you absolutely have to make a decision by a certain
time. Tn these cases, consider selecting a fallback decision-making
plan.
For example, you could announce: "We have a critical deci­
sion 10 make that affects all of us, and it must be made by ten

=== Page 192 ===
174 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
sharp. I propose that we use consensus to decide. However, if by
9:45 we have not come to consensus, then it will become a con­
sult decision. I will use your input, and I will decide."
This strategy allows you to try for the optimum decision-mak­
ing method, but it leaves you a back door without making you
look like a despot when time runs out.
MAKING ASSIGNMENTS-PUTTING DECISIONS
INTO ACTION
Now let's take a look at the final step. You've engaged in healthy
dialogue, filled the pool of meaning, decided how you're going
to draw from the pool, and eventually come to some decisions.
It's time to do something. Some of the items may have been
completely resolved during the discussion, but many may
require a person or team to do something. You'll have to make
assignmen ts.
As you might suspect, when you're involved with two or more
people, there's a chance that there will be some confusion. To
avoid common traps, make sure you consider the following four
elements:
• Who?
• Does what?
• By when?
• How will you follow up?
Who?
To quote an English proverb, "Everybody's business is nobody's
business." If you don't make an actual assignment to an actual
person, there's a good chance that nothing will ever come of all
the work you've gone through to make a decision.

=== Page 193 ===
MOVE TO ACTION 1 75
When it's time to pass out assignments, remember, there is no
"we." "We," when it comes to assignments, actually means, "not
me." It's code. Even when individuals are not trying to duck an
assignment, the term "we" can lead them to believe that others
are taking on the responsibility.
Assign a name to every responsibility. This especially applies
at home. If you're divvying up household chores, be sure you've
got a specific person to go with each chore. That is, if you assign
two or three people to take on a task, appoint one of them the
responsible party. Otherwise, any sense of responsibility will be
lost in a flurry of finger-pointing later on.
Does What?
Be sure to spell out the exact deliverables you have in mind. The
fuzzier the expectations, the higher the likelihood of disappoint­
ment. For example, the eccentric entrepreneur Howard Hughes
once assigned a team of engineers to design and build the world's
first steam-powered car. When sharing his dream of a vehicle that
could run on heated water, he gave them virtually no direction.
After several years of intense labor the engineers successfully
produced the first prototype by running dozens of pipes through
the car's body-thus solving the problem of where to put all the
water required to run a steam-powered car. The vehicle was
essentially a giant radiator.
When Hughes asked the engineers what would happen if the
car got into a wreck, they nervously explained that the passen­
gers would be boiled alive, much like lobsters in a pot. Hughes
was so upset in what the crew came up with that he insisted they
cut it up into pieces no larger than three inches. That was the
cnd of the project.
Lcarn from Hughes. When you're first agreeing on an assign­
mcnt, clarify up front the exact details of what you want.

=== Page 194 ===
176 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
Couples get into trouble in this area when one of the parties
doesn't want to take the time to think carefully about the "deliv­
erables" and then later on becomes upset because his or her
unstated desires weren't met. Have you ever remodeled a room
with a loved one? Then you know what we're talking about.
Better to spend the time up front clarifying exactly what you want
rather than waste resources and hurt feelings on the back end.
To help clarify deliverables, use Contrasting. If you've seen
people misunderstand an assignment in the past, explain the
common mistake as an example of what you don't want. If pos­
sible, point to physical examples. Rather than talk in the
abstract, bring a prototype or sample. We learned this particular
trick when hiring a set designer. The renowned designer talked
about what he would deliver, and it sounded great to us. Twenty­
five thousand dollars later he delivered something that would
never work. We had to start over from scratch. From that day on
we've learned to point to pictures and talk about what we want
and don't want. The clearer the picture of the deliverable, the
less likely you'll be unpleasantly surprised.
By When?
It's shocking how often people leave this element out of an
assignment. Instead of giving a deadline, people simply point to
the setting sun of "someday." With vague or unspoken deadlines,
other urgencies come up, and the assignment finds its way to the
bottom of the pile, where it is soon forgotten. Assignments with­
out deadlines are far better at producing guilt than stimulating
action. Goals without deadlines aren't goals; they're merely
directions.
How Will You Follow Up?
Always agree on how often and by what method you'll follow up
on the assignment. It could be a simple email confirming the

=== Page 195 ===
MOVE TO ACTION 177
completion of a project. It might be a full report in a team or
family meeting. More often than not, it comes down to progress
checks along the way.
It's actually fairly easy to build follow-up methods into the
assignment. For example: "Call me on my cell phone when you
finish your homework. Then you can go play with friends.
Okay?"
Or perhaps you'll prefer to rely on milestones: "Let me know
when you've completed your library research. Then we'll sit down
and look at the next steps." Milestones, of course, must be linked
to a drop-dead date. "Let me know as soon you've completed the
research component of this project. You've got until the last week
in November, but if you finish earlier, give me a call."
Remember, if you want people to feel accountable, you must
give them an opportunity to account. Build an expectation for
follow-up into every assignment.
DOCUMENT YOUR WORK
Once again, a proverb comes to mind. "One dull pencil is worth
six sharp minds." Don't leave your hard work to memory. If
you've gone to the effort to complete a crucial conversation,
don't fritter away all the meaning you created by trusting your
memories. Write down the details of conclusions, decisions, and
assignments. Remember to record who does what by when.
Revisit your notes at key times (usually the next meeting) and
review assignments.
As you review what was supposed to be completed, hold peo­
ple accountable. When someone fails to deliver on a promise, it's
time for dialogue. Discuss the issue by using the STATE skills we
covered in Chapter 7. By holding people accountable, not only
do you increase their motivation and ability to deliver on prom­
ises. but you create a culture of integrity.

=== Page 196 ===
178 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
SUMMARY-MOVE TO ACTION
Turn your successful crucial conversations into great decisions
and united action by avoiding the two traps of violated expecta­
tions and inaction.
Decide How to Decide
• Command. Decisions are made without involving others.
• Consult. Input is gathered from the group and then a subset
decides.
• Vote. An agreed-upon percentage swings the decision.
• Consensus. Everyone comes to an agreement and then sup­
ports the final decision.
Finish Clearly
Determine who does what by when. Make the deliverables crys­
tal clear. Set a follow-up time. Record the commitments and then
follow up. Finally, hold people accountable to their promises.

=== Page 197 ===
1 0
Communication works for those who work at it.
-JOHN POWELL
Putting I t All
Together
Tools for Preparing
and Learning
If you read the previous pages in a short period of time, you
probably feel like an anaconda who just swallowed a warthog.
It's a lot to digest.
You may well be wondering at this point how you can possi­
bly keep all these ideas straight -especially during something as
unpredictable and fast moving as a crucial conversation.
This chapter will help with the daunting task of making dia­
logue tools and skills memorable and useable. First, we'll sim­
plify things by sharing what we've heard from people who have
L:hanged their lives by using these skills. Second, we'll lay out a
model that can help you visually organize the seven dialogue
principles. Third, wc'lI walk through an example of a crucial
convcrsation where all the dialogue principles are applied.

=== Page 198 ===
1 80 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
TWO LEVERS
Over the years, people often tell us that the principles and skills
contained in this book have helped them a great deal. But how?
In what way can the printed word lead to important changes?
After watching people at home and at work, as well as inter­
viewing them, we've learned that most people make progress not
by focusing on specific skills-at least to start with-but instead
by applying two of the main principles in this book. We hope
that as we share their success strategies with you, you'll feel
more confident getting started on the road to improved results
and relationships.
Learn to Look. The first lever for positive change is Learn to
Look. That is, people who improve their dialogue skills continu­
ally ask themselves whether they're in or out of dialogue. This
alone makes a huge difference. Even people who can't remember
or never learned the skills of STATE or CRIB, etc., are able to
benefit from this material by simply asking if they're falling into
silence or violence. They may not know exactly how to fix the
specific problem they're facing, but they do know that if they're
not in dialogue, it can't be good. And then they try something to
get back to dialogue. As it turns out, trying something is better
than doing nothing.
So remember to ask the following important question: "Are
we playing games or are we in dialogue?" It's a wonderful start.
Many people get additional help in learning to look from their
friends. They go through training as families or teams. As they
share concepts and ideas, they learn a common vocabulary. This
shared way of talking about crucial conversations helps people
change.
Perhaps the most common way that the language of dialogue
finds itself into everyday conversation is with the expression, "I

=== Page 199 ===
PUITING IT ALL TOGETHER 181
think we've moved away from dialogue." This simple reminder
helps people catch themselves early on, before the damage is severe.
As we've watched executive teams, work groups, and couples sim­
ply go public with the fact that they're starting to move toward
silence or violence, others often recognize the problem and take
corrective action. "You're right. I'm not telling you what needs to
be said," or "I'm sorry. I have been trying to force my ideas on you."
Make It Safe. The second lever is Make It Safe. We've sug­
gested that dialogue consists of the free flow of meaning and that
the number one flow stopper is a lack of safety. When you notice
that you and others have moved away from dialogue, do some­
thing to make it safer. Anything. We've suggested a few skills,
but those are merely a handful of common practices. They're not
immutable principles. To no one's surprise, there many things
you can do to increase safety. If you simply realize that your chal­
lenge is to make it safer, nine out of ten times you'll intuitively
do something that helps.
Sometimes you'll build safety by asking a question and show­
ing interest in others' views. Sometimes an appropriate touch
(with loved ones and family members-not at work where
touching can equate with harassment) can communicate safety.
Apologies, smiles, even a request for a brief "time out" can help
restore safety when things get dicey. The main idea is to make it
safe. Do something to make others comfortable. And remember,
virtually every skill we've covered in this book, from Contrasting
to CRIB, offers a tool for building safety.
These two levers form the basis for recognizing, building, and
maintaining dialogue. When the concept of dialogue is intro­
duced, these are the ideas most people can readily take in and
apply to crucial conversations. Now let's move on to a discussion
uf the rest of the principles we've covered.

=== Page 200 ===
1 82 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
A MODEL OF DIALOGUE
To help organize our thinking and to make it easier to recall the
principles (and when to apply them), let's look at the model
shown in Figure 10-1. It begins with concentric circles-like a
target. Notice that the center circle is the Pool of Shared
Meaning-it's the center of the target, or the aim of dialogue.
When meaning flows freely, it finds its way into this pool, which
represents people's best collective thinking.
Surrounding the Pool of Shared Meaning is safety. Safety
allows us to share meaning and keeps us from moving into
silence or violence. When conversations become crucial, safety
must be strong.
Watch for games. Next you'll notice that we've portrayed the
behaviors to watch when thinking about safety. These are the six
silence and violence behaviors we look for in others and in out-
Figure 10-1. The Dialogue Model

=== Page 201 ===
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER 183
Figure 10-2. The Dialogue Model
breaks of our own Style Under Stress. When we see these or sim­
ilar behaviors, we know that safety is weak. This is a cue to step
out of the content of the conversation, strengthen safety, and
then step back in. Remember, don't back away or weaken the
argument. Just rebuild safety. Do it quickly. The further you
move from dialogue into silence or violence, the harder it is to
get back and the greater the costs.
Now, let's add people to our model.
Me and Others. (Figure 10-2). You are the "ME" arrow on the
model. Others are included in the "OTHER" arrow. The arrows
(both pointed to the center of the pool) show that both we and
others are in dialogue. All our meaning is flowing freely into the
shared pool. Learn to Look means we watch for when either of
these two arrows begins to point upward or downward, toward
silence or violence. When this happens, either you or others are
starting to play games.
Watching and building conditions. (Figure 10-3). When you
sec yourself drifting to sikncc or violence, Start with Heart. Keep

=== Page 202 ===
184 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
Figure 10-3. The Dialogue Model
yourself in dialogue by focusing on what you really want and then
behaving as if you really do want it. Av oid the Sucker's Choices
that make it appear as if silence and violence are the only options.
When your emotions start running strong and taking control of
the conversation, use the Master My Stories principle to bring
your arrow back to the Pool of Shared Meaning. Retrace your Path
to Action, watch for clever stories, and tell the rest of the story.
When others move to silence or violence, Make It Safe. As we
strengthen safety, others are more likely to lay aside their silence
and violence and move back toward dialogue in the center.
What to do. The next three principles teach us what to do with
our meaning. First, we learned to STATE My Path. We share our
own sensitive or controversial views by following our Path to
Action. We share the facts first and then tentatively share our
story. We then demonstrate we're serious about dialogue by
encouraging others to share their story (Figure 10-4 )-especially
if it's different from our own.

=== Page 203 ===
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER 185
Figure 10-4. The Dialogue Model
To help others share their meaning, we Explore Others' Paths.
We ask, mirror, paraphrase, and prime (AMPP) as needed to get
to their feelings, stories, and facts. As we use these skills effec­
tively, we demonstrate that their concerns are discussable-that
dialogue can actually work. This helps others feel safer sur­
rendering their silence and violence and joining us in dialogue.
Finally, with the Pool of Shared Meaning full, we Move to
Action. We ensure that we are clear about how decisions are
being made and about what the decisions are. And we follow up
to ensure that dialogue leads to positive actions and results.
You can use the Dialogue Model first to diagnose what's going
un. Remember to ask: "Where am I?" ''Where are others?" "Are we
in dialogue or in some form of silence or violence?"
Next ask, "Where do I want to be?" "Where do I want others to
be?" The principles and tools become the methods and means to
get to dialogue.

=== Page 204 ===
186 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
HOW TO PREPARE FOR A CRUCIAL CONVERSATION
Here's one last tool to help you organize what we've shared about
mastering crucial conversations. This tool will help you prepare
for an upcoming crucial conversation or learn from one that
you've already held.
Take a look at the table entitled Coaching for Crucial
Conversations, which follows. The first column in the table lists
the seven dialogue principles we've shared. The second column
summarizes the skills associated with each principle. The final
column is the best place to start coaching yourself or others. This
column includes a list of questions that will help you apply spe­
cific skills to your conversations.
Coaching for Crucial Conversations
Principle Skill Crucial Question
1. Start with Focus on what you What am I acting like
Heart really want. I really want?
(Chapter 3) What do I really want?
• For me?
• For others?
• For the relationship?
How would I behave if I
really did want this?
Refuse the Sucker's What do I not want?
Choice. How should I go about
getting what I really want
and avoiding what I don't
want?
2. Learn to Look for when the Am I going to silence or
Look conversation becomes violence?
(Chapter 4) crucial. Are others?
Look for saftey problems.
Look for our own Style
Under Stress.

=== Page 205 ===
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER 187
Coaching for Crucial Conversations (Continued)
Principle Skill Crucial Question
3. Make It Apologize when Why is safety at risk?
Safe appropriate. Have I established
•
(Chapter 5) Contrast to fix Mutual Purpose?
misunderstanding. Am I maintaining
•
CRIB to get to Mutual Respect?
Mutual Purpose. What will I do to rebuild
safety?
4. Master Retrace my Path to What is my story?
My Stories Action.
(Chapter 6) Separate fact from story.
Watch for Three Clever
Stories.
Tell the rest of the story. What am I pretending not
to know about my role in
the problem?
Why would a reasonable,
rational, and decent person
do this?
What should I do right now
to move toward what I
really want?
5. STATE Share your facts. Am I really open to others'
y
My Path lell our story. views?
(Chapter 7) Ask for others' paths. Am I talking about the real
lalk tentatively. issue?
Encourage testing. Am I confidently expressing
my own views?
6. Explore Ask. Am I actively exploring
Others' Mirror. others' views?
Paths Earaphrase.
(Chapter 8) £rimc.

=== Page 206 ===
188 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
Coaching for Crucial Conversations (Continued)
Principle Skill Crucial Question
Agree. Am I avoiding unnecessary
Ruild. disagreement?
Compare.
7. Move Decide how you'll How will we make
to Action decide. decisions?
(Chapter 9) Document decisions Who will do what by when?
and follow up. How will we follow up?
let's See How It All Works
We've included an extended case here to show how these prin­
ciples might look when you find yourself in the middle of a cru­
cial conversation. It outlines a tough discussion between you
and your sister about dividing your mother's estate. The case is
set up to illustrate where the principles apply, and to briefly
review each principle as it comes up in the conversation.
The conversation begins with you bringing up the family sum­
merhouse. Your mother's funeral was a month ago, and now it's
time to split up both money and keepsakes. You're not really
looking forward to it.
The issue is made touchier by the fact that you feel that since
you almost single-handedly cared for your mother during the
last several years, you should be compensated. You don't think
your sister will see things the same way.
Your Crucial Conversation
YOU: We have to sell the summer cottage. We never use it,
and we need the cash to pay for my expenses from taking
care of Mom the past four years.

=== Page 207 ===
pum N G IT ALL TOG ETH ER 1 89
SISTER: Please don't start with the guilt. I sent you money
every month to help take care of Mom. If I didn't have
to travel for my jobs, you know I would have wanted her
at my house.
You notice that emotions are already getting strong. You're
getting defensive, and your sister seems to be angry. You're in a
crucial conversation, and it's not going well.
Start with Heart
Ask yourself what you really want. You want to be compensated
fairly for the extra time and money you put in that your sister
didn't. You also want to keep a good relationship with your sister.
But you want to avoid making a Sucker's Choice. So you ask
yourself: "How can I tell her that I want to be compensated
fairly for the extra effort and expense I put in and keep a good
relationship?"
Learn to Look
You recognize a lack of Mutual Purpose-you're both trying to
defend your actions rather than discuss the estate.
Make It Safe
Contrast to help your sister understand your purpose.
YOU: I don't want to start an argument or try to make you
feel guilty. But I do want to talk about being compensated
for shouldering most of the responsibility over the last few
years. I love Mom, but it put quite a strain on me finan­
cially and emotionally.
SISTER: What makes you think you did so much more than I
did?

=== Page 208 ===
190 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
Master My Stories
You're telling yourself that you deserve more because you did
more to care for your mother and covered unplanned expenses.
Retrace your Path to Action to find out what facts are behind the
story you're telling that's making you angry.
STATE My Path
You need to share your facts and conclusions with your sister in
a way that will make her feel safe telling her story.
YOU: It's just that I spent a lot of money taking care of Mom
and did a lot of work caring for her instead of bringing in
a nurse. I know you cared about Mom too, but I honestly
feel like I did more in the day-to-day caregiving than you
did, and it only seems fair to use some of what she left us
to repay a part of what I spent. Do you see it differently?
I'd really like to hear.
SISTER: Okay, fine. Why don't you just send me a bill.
It sounds as though your sister isn't really okay with this
arrangement. You can tell her voice is tense and her tone is one
of giving in, not of true agreement.
Explore Others' Paths
Since part of your objective is to maintain a good relationship
with your sister, it's important that she add her meaning to the
pool. Use the AMPP skills to actively explore her views.
YOU: The way you say that makes it sound like maybe that
suggestion isn't okay with you. [Mirror] Is there some­
thing I'm missing? [Ask]
SISTER: No-if you feel like you deserve more than I do,
you're probably right.

=== Page 209 ===
PUTTI NG IT ALL TOGETH ER 1 91
You: Do you think I'm being unfair? That I'm not acknowl­
edging your contributions? [Prime]
SISTER: It's just that I know I wasn't around much in the last
couple of years. I've had to travel a lot for work. But I still
visited whenever I could, and I sent money every month
to help contribute to Mom's care. I offered to help pay to
bring in a nurse if you thought it was necessary. I didn't
know you felt you had an unfair share of the responsibil­
ity, and it seems like your asking for more money is com­
ing out of nowhere.
You: So you feel like you were doing everything you could
to help out and are surprised that I feel like I should be
compensated? [Paraphrase]
SISTER: Well, yes.
Explore Others' Paths
You understand your sister's story now and still disagree to a
point. Use the ABC skills to explain how your view differs. You
agree in part with how your sister sees things. Use building to
emphasize what you agree with and to bring up what you dif­
fer on.
You: You're right. You did a lot to help out, and I realize
that it was expensive to visit as often as you did. I opted
not to pay for professional home health care because
Mom was more comfortable with me taking care of her,
and I didn't mind that. On top of that, there were some
incidental expenses it doesn't sound like you were aware
of. The new medication she was on during the last eight­
een months was twice as expensive as the old, and the
insurance only covered a percentage of her hospital stays.
It adds up.

=== Page 210 ===
192 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
SISTER: So it's these expenses you're worried about cover­
ing? Could we go over these expenses to decide how to
cover them?
Move to Action
You want to create a definite plan for being reimbursed for these
expenses, and you want it to be one you both agree on. Come to
a consensus about what will happen, and document who does
what by when, and settle on a way to follow up.
You: I've kept a record of all the expenses that went over
the amount that both of us agreed to contribute. Can we
sit down tomorrow to go over those and talk about what's
fair to reimburse me for?
SISTER: Okay. We'll talk about the estate and write up a plan
for how to divide things up.
SUMMARY-PUTTING IT All TOGETHER
If we first learn to recognize when safety is at risk and a conver­
sation becomes crucial (Learn to Look) and that we need to take
steps to Make It Safe for everyone to contribute his or her mean­
ing, we can begin to see where to apply the skills we've learned.
A visual model can also help us see where the principles and
skills are needed.
Using these tools and reminders will get us started in master­
ing the skills that help us improve our crucial conversations.

=== Page 211 ===
1 1
surprised is half
A beaten.
man
-THOMAS FULLER
Yeah, But
Advice for Tough Cases
As we (the authors) have taught this material, we've grown
accustomed to people saying, "Yeah, but my situation's more dif­
ficult than that!" Or "Yeah, but the people I deal with aren't so
quick to come around. Besides, most of the problems I face come
as a surprise. I'm caught off guard." In short, people can think
of a dozen reasons why the skills we've been talking about don't
apply to the situations they care about.
• "Yeah, but what if someone does something that's really sub­
tle? It drives you crazy but it's hard to identify. How do you
handle that?"
• "Yeah, but what if my life partner refuses to ever talk about
anything impurtant? You can't force a person into dialogue."

=== Page 212 ===
194 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
• "Yeah, but what if I can't calm down quickly enough? I've
been told not to go to bed angry, but sometimes I think I need
time alone. What should I do?"
• "Yeah, but what if I don't trust the other person? How am I
supposed to deal with that?"
• "Yeah, but both my boss and spouse are too sensitive to take
any feedback. Shouldn't I just let things slide?"
In truth, the dialogue skills we've shared apply to just about
any problem you can imagine. However, since some are more dif­
ficult than others, we've chosen seventeen tough cases. We'll
take a moment to share a thought or two on each.
SEXUAL OR OTHER HARASSMENT
"YEAH IT'S NOT LIKE ANYONE'S BLATANTLY harassing me or
I
BUT... anything, but I don't like the way I'm being treated.
How can I bring it up without making enemies?"
The Danger Point
Someone is making comments or gestures that you find offen­
sive. The person does it seldom enough and he or she's subtle
enough that you're not sure if HR or your boss can even help.
What can you do?
In these situations it's easy to think that the offender has all
the power. It seems as if the rules of polite society make it so that
others can behave inappropriately and you end up looking like
you're overreacting if you bring it up.
Generally speaking, a vast majority of these problems go away
if they're privately, respectfully, and firmly discussed. Your
biggest challenge will be the respect part. If you put up with this
behavior for too long, you'll be inclined to tell a more and more
potent Villain Story about the offender. This will jack up your

=== Page 213 ===
YEAH, BUT 195
emotions to the point that you'll go in with guns blazing-even
if only through your body language.
The Solution
Tell the rest of the story. If you've tolerated the behavior for a long
time before holding the conversation, own up to it. This may help
you treat the individual like a reasonable, rational, and decent
person-even if some of his or her behavior doesn't fit this
description.
When you feel a measure of respect for the other person,
you're ready to begin. After establishing a Mutual Purpose for
the exchange, STATE your path. For example:
''I'd like to talk about something that's getting in the way of
my working with you. It's a tough issue to bring up, but I
think it'll help us be better teammates if I do. Is that okay?"
[Establish Mutual Purpose]
"When I walk into your office, sometimes your eyes
move up and down my body. And when I sit next to you at
a computer, sometimes you put your arm around the back
of my chair. I don't know that you're aware you're doing
these things, so I thought I'd bring them up because they
send a message that makes me uncomfortable. How do you
see it?" [STATE My Path]
If you can be respectful and private but firm in this conversa­
tion, most problem behavior will stop. And remember, if the
behavior is over the line, you shouldn't hesitate to contact HR to
ensure your rights and dignity are protected.
MY OVERLY SENSITIVE SPOUSE
"YEAH, WHAT DO YOU DO WHEN your spouse is too sensitive? You
BUT. .. try to give him or her some constructive feedback, but he
or she (('(Je/<, "(J \Irorrgly that you end up going to silence."

=== Page 214 ===
196 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
The Danger Point
Often couples come to an unspoken agreement during the first
year or so of their marriage that affects how they communicate
for the rest of their marriage. Say one person is touchy and
can't take feedback, or the other doesn't give it very well. In
any case, they in effect agree to say nothing to each other. They
live in silence. Problems have to be huge before they're dis­
cussed.
The Solution
This is generally a problem of not knowing how to STATE
your path. When something bothers you, catch it early.
Contrasting can also help. "I'm not trying to blow this out of
proportion. I just want to deal with it before it gets out of
hand." Describe the specific behaviors you've observed.
"When Jimmy leaves his room a mess, you use sarcasm to get
his attention. You call him a 'pig' and then laugh as if you
didn't mean it." Tentatively explain the consequences. "I don't
think it's having the effect you want. He doesn't pick up on the
hint, and I'm afraid that he's starting to resent you" (Your
story). Encourage testing: "Do you see it differently?"
Finally, Learn to Look for signs that safety is at risk, and Make
It Safe. When you STATE things well and others become defen­
sive, refuse to conclude that the issue is impossible to discuss.
Think harder about your approach. Step out of the content, do
what it takes to make sure your partner feels safe, and then try
again to candidly STATE your view.
When spouses stop giving each other helpful feedback, they
lose out on the help of a lifelong confidant and coach. They miss
out on hundreds of opportunities to help each other communicate
more effectively.

=== Page 215 ===
YEAH, BUT 197
FAilURE TO LIVE UP TO AGREEMENTS
nYEAH, MY TEAMMATES ARE hypocrites. We get together and
BUT... talk about all the ways we could improve, but then
people don't do what they agreed to."
The Danger Point
The worst teams walk away from problems like these. In good
teams, the boss eventually deals with problem behavior. In the
best teams, every team member is part of the system of account­
ability. If team members see others violate a team agreement,
they speak up immediately and directly. It's dangerous to wait for
or expect the boss to do what good teammates should do them­
selves.
The Solution
If your teammate isn't doing what you think he or she should, it's
up to you to speak up.
We realized this after watching a group of executives that
agreed they'd hold off on all discretionary spending to help free
up cash for a short-term crunch. This strategy sounded good in
the warm glow of an off-site meeting, but the very next day a
team member rushed back and prepaid a vendor for six months
of consulting work-work that appeared to be "discretionary."
A team member who saw the executive prepare for and then
make the prepayment didn't realize this was the crucial conver­
sation that would determine whether the team would pull
together or fall apart on this issue. Instead, he decided it was up
to the boss to hold this person accountable. He said nothing. By
the time the boss found out about the transaction and addressed
the issue. the policy had already been violated and the money

=== Page 216 ===
198 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
spent. Motivation to support the new plan dissipated, and the
team ran short of cash.
When teams try to rally around aggressive change or bold new
initiatives, they need to be prepared to address the problem
when a team member doesn't live up to the agreement. Success
does not depend on perfect compliance with new expectations,
but on teammates who hold crucial conversations with one
another when others appear to be reverting to old patterns.
DEFERENCE TO AUTHORITY
"YEAH, PEOPLE WHO WORK FOR ME FILTER WHAT they say by
BUT. .. guessing what they think I'm willing to hear. They take
little initiative in solving important problems because
they're afraid 1'1/ disagree with them."
The Danger Point
When leaders face deference-or what feels like kissing up­
they typically make one of two mistakes. Either they misdiagnose
the cause (fear), or they try to banish deference with a brash
command.
Misdiagnose. Often, leaders are causing the fear but denying
it. "Who me? I don't do a thing to make people feel uncomfort­
able." They haven't Learned to Look. They're unaware of their
Style Under Stress. Despite this disclaimer, the way they carry
themselves, their habit of speaking in absolutes, their subtle use
of authority-something out there-is creating fear and eventual
deference.
Then there's the other misdiagnosis: leaders who face "head­
bobbing kiss-ups" often think they're doing something wrong
when, in fact, they're living with ghosts of previous leaders. They
do their best to be open and supportive and to involve people,

=== Page 217 ===
YEAH, BUT 199
but despite their genuine efforts, people still keep their distance.
Often, people treat their leaders like celebrities or dictators,
regardless of the fact that they've done nothing to deserve it.
Before you do anything, you need to find out if you're the
cause, if you're living with ghosts of bosses past, or both.
Command it away. Many leaders seek the simple path. They
tell people to stop deferring.
"It seems to me that you're agreeing with me because I'm
the boss and not because what I'm saying makes sense."
"Absolutely!"
"I'd prefer that you stop deferring to me and simply listen
to the idea."
"Okay. whatever you say, Boss!"
With ingrained deference you face a catch-22. If you don't say
something, it'll probably continue. If you do say something, you
may be inadvertently encouraging it to continue.
The Solution
Work on me first. Discover your part in the problem. Don't ask
your direct reports. If they're already deferring to you, they'll
whitewash the problem. Consult with a peer who watches you in
action. Ask for honest feedback. Are you doing things that cause
people to defer to you? If so, what? Explore your peer's path by
having him or her point out your specific behaviors. Jointly devel­
op a plan of attack, work on it, and seek continued feedback.
If the problem stems from ghosts (the actions of previous
leaders), go public. Describe the problem in a group or team
meeting and then ask for advice. Don't try to command it away.
You can't. Reward risk takers. Encourage testing. When people
do express an opinion contrary to yours, thank them for their
honesty. Play devil's advocate. If you can't get others to disagree,

=== Page 218 ===
200 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
then disagree with yourself. Let people know that all ideas are
open to question. If you need to, leave the room. Give people
some breathing space.
FAILED TRUST
n YEA H, I DON'T KNOW WHAT to do. I'm not sure I can trust this
BUT. .. person. He missed an important deadline. Now I wonder
if I should trust him again."
The Danger Point
People often assume that trust is something you have or don't
have. Either you trust someone or you don't. That puts too much
pressure on trust. "What do you mean I can't stay out past mid­
night? Don't you trust me?" your teenage son inquires.
Trust doesn't have to be universally offered. In truth, it's usu­
ally offered in degrees and is very topic specific. It also comes in
two flavors-motive and ability. For example, you can trust me
to administer CPR if needed; I'm motivated. But you can't trust
me to do a good job; I know nothing about it.
The Solution
Deal with trust around the issue, not around the person.
When it comes to regaining trust in others, don't set the bar
too high. Just try to trust them in the moment, not across all
issues. You don't have to trust them in everything. To make it
safe for yourself in the moment, bring up your concerns.
Tentatively STATE what you see happening. "I get the sense that
you're only sharing the good side of your plan. I need to hear the
possible risks before I'm comfortable. Is that okay?" If they play
games, call them on it.

=== Page 219 ===
YEAH. BUT 201
Also, don't use your mistrust as a club to punish people. If
they've earned your mistrust in one area, don't let it bleed over
into your overall perception of their character. If you tell yourself
a Villain Story that exaggerates others' untrustworthiness, you'll
act in ways that help them justify themselves in being even less
worthy of your trust. You'll start up a self-defeating cycle and get
more of what you don't want.
WON'T TALK ABOUT ANYTHING SERIOUS
lIYEAH, MY SPOUSE IS THE person you talked about earlier. You
BUT. .. know, I try to hold a meaningful discussion, I try to
work through an important problem, and he or she
simply withdraws. What can I do?"
The Danger Point
It's common to blame others for not wanting to stay in dia­
logue as if it were some kind of genetic disorder. That's not the
problem. If others don't want to talk about tough issues, it's
because they believe that it won't do any good. Either they
aren't good at dialogue, or you aren't, or you both aren't-or
so they think.
The Solution
Work on me first. Your spouse may have an aversion to all cru­
cial conversations, even when talking to a skilled person.
Nevertheless, you're still the only person you can work on. Start
with simple challenges. Don't go for the really tough issues. Do
your best to Make It Safe. Constantly watch to see when your
spouse starts to become uncomfortable. Use tentative language.
Separate intent from outcome. "" m pretty sure you're not intend-

=== Page 220 ===
202 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
ing to . . ." If your spouse consistently seems unwilling to talk
about his or her personal issues, learn how to Explore Others'
Paths. Practice these skills every chance you get. In short, start
simply and then bring all your dialogue tools into play.
Now, having said all of this, exercise patience. Don't nag.
Don't lose hope and then go to violence. Every time you become
aggressive or insulting, you give your spouse additional evidence
that crucial conversations do nothing but cause harm.
If you're constantly on your best dialogue behavior, you'll
build more safety in the relationship and your spouse will be
more likely to begin picking up on the cues and start coming
around.
When you see signs of improvement, you can accelerate the
growth by inviting your spouse to talk with you about how you
talk. Your challenge here is to build safety by establishing a
compelling Mutual Purpose. You need to help your partner see a
reason for having this conversation-a reason that is so com­
pelling that he or she will be willing to take part.
Share what you think the consequences of having or not hav­
ing this conversation could be (both positive and negative).
Explain what it means to both you and the relationship. Then
invite your spouse to help identify the topics you have a hard
time discussing. Take turns describing how you both tend to
approach these topics. Then discuss the possible benefits of help­
ing each other make improvements.
Sometimes if you can't talk about the tough topics, you can
more easily talk about how you talk-or don't talk-about them.
That helps get things started.
VAGUE BUT ANNOYING
"YEAH, THE PERSON I'M THINKING OF doesn't do blatantly
BUT. .. unacceptable things-nothing to write home about­
just subtle stuff that's starting to drive me crazy."

=== Page 221 ===
The Danger Point
If people simply bother you at some abstract level, maybe what
they're doing isn't worthy of a conversation. Perhaps the prob­
lem is not their behavior but your tolerance. For example, an
executive laments, "My employees really disappoint me. Just
look at the length of their hair." It turns out that the employees
in question have no contact with anyone besides one another.
Their hair length has nothing to do with job performance. The
boss really has no reason to say anything.
However, when actions are both subtle and unacceptable,
then you have to retrace your Path to Action and put your finger
on exactly what others are doing or you have nothing to discuss.
Abstract descriptions peppered with your vague conclusions or
stories have no place in crucial conversations. For example,
whenever your family gets together, your brother constantly
takes potshots at everyone else using sarcastic humor. The indi­
vidual comments aren't directly insulting enough to discuss.
What you want to talk about is the fact that these constant com­
ments make every get-together feel negative. Remember, clarify­
ing the facts is the homework required for crucial conversations.
The Solution
Retrace your Path to Action to its source. Identify specific behaviors
that are out of bounds and take note. When you've done your home­
work, consider the behaviors you noted and make sure the story
you're telling yourself about these behaviors is important enough for
dialogue. If it is, then Make It Safe and STATE Your Path.
SHOWS NO INITIATIVE
"YEAH, SOME MEMBERS OF MY WORK TEAM do what they're
BUT. .. asked, but no more. If they run into a problem, they
lake' one simple slab at fixing it. But if their efforts
don't pay ofr, thc'y qllit."

=== Page 222 ===
204 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
The Danger Point
Most people are far more likely to talk about the presence of a
bad behavior than the absence of a good one. When someone
really messes up, leaders and parents alike are compelled to take
action. However, when people simply fail to be excellent, it's
hard to know what to say.
The Solution
Establish new and higher expectations. Don't deal with a specific
instance; deal with the overall pattern. If you want someone to
show more initiative, tell him or her. Give specific examples of
when the person ran into a barrier and then backed off after a
single try. Raise the bar and then make it crystal clear what
you've done. Jointly brainstorm what the person could have done
to be both more persistent and more creative in coming up with
a solution.
For instance, "I asked you to finish up a task that absolutely
had to be completed before I returned from a trip. You ran into
a problem, tried to get in touch with me, and then simply left a
message with my four-year-old. What could you have done to
track me down on the road?" or "What would it have taken to
create a backup strategy?"
Pay attention to ways you are compensating for someone's
lack of initiative. Have you made yourself responsible for fol­
lowing up? If so, talk with that person about assuming this
responsibility. Have you asked more than one person to take the
same assignment so you can be sure it will get done? If so, talk
to the person originally assigned about reporting progress to you
early so you only need to put someone else on the job when
there's a clear need for more resources.
Stop acting out your expectations that others won't take initia­
tive. Instead, talk your expectations out and come to agreements

=== Page 223 ===
YEAH, BUT 205
that place the responsibility on the team members while giving
you information early enough that you aren't left high and dry.
SHOWS A PATTERN
YEA H, IT ISN'T A SINGLE PROBLEM. It's that I keep having to
u
talk with people about the same problem. I feel like I
BUT...
have to choose between being a nag and putting up
with the problem. Now what?"
The Danger Point
Some crucial conversations go poorly because you're having the
wrong conversations. You talk to someone who is late for a
meeting for the second time, Then the third. Your blood begins
to boil. Then you bite your lip and give another gentle reminder.
Finally, after your resentment builds up (because you're telling
yourself an ugly story), you become violent. You make a sarcas­
tic or cutting comment and then end up looking stupid because
the reaction seems way out of line given the minor offense.
If you continue to return to the original problem (coming in
late) without talking about the new problem (failing to live up to
commitments), you're stuck in "Groundhog Day." We talk about
this problem using the Groundhog Day movie metaphor. If you
return to the same initial problem, you're like Bill Murray in the
movie-you're forced to relive the same situation over and over
rather than deal with the bigger problem. Nothing ever gets
resolved.
The Solution
Learn to Look for patterns. Don't focus exclusively on a single
event. Watch fol' behavior over time. Then STATE Your Path by
talking about th(: pu1t(:rn, Por example, if a person is late for

=== Page 224 ===
206 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
meetings and agrees to do better, the next conversation should
not be about tardiness. It should be about his or her failure to
keep a commitment. This is a bigger issue. It's now about trust
and respect.
People often become far more emotional than the issue they're
discussing warrants because they're talking about the wrong
issue. If you're really bothered because of a pattern, but you're
talking about this latest instance, your emotions will seem out of
proportion. In contrast, an interesting thing happens when you
hold the right conversation. Your emotions calm down. When
you talk about what's really eating you-the pattern-you'll be
able to be more composed and effective.
Don't get pulled into any one instance or your concern will
seem trivial. Talk about the overall pattern.
I NEED TIME TO CALM DOWN!
"YEAH, IVE BEEN TOLD THAT I should never go to bed angry. Is
BUT. .. that always a good idea?"
The Danger Point
Once you've become angry, it's not always easy to calm down.
You've told yourself an ugly story, your body has responded by
preparing for a fight, and now you're trying your best not to
duke it out-only your body hasn't caught up with your brain.
So what do you do? Do you try to stay in dialogue even though
your intuition tells you to back off and buy some time? After all,
Mom said, "Never go to bed angry."
The Solution
Okay, so your mom wasn't exactly right. She was right by sug­
gesting that you shouldn't let serious problems go unresolved.

=== Page 225 ===
YEAH, BUT 207
She was wrong about always sticking with a discussion, no mat­
ter your emotional state. It's perfectly okay to suggest that you
need some time alone and that you'd like to pick up the discus­
sion later on-say, tomorrow. Then, after you've dissipated the
adrenaline and have had time to think about the issues, hold the
conversation. Coming to mutual agreement to take a time-out is
not the same thing as going to silence. In fact, it's a very healthy
example of dialogue.
As a sidenote on this topic, it's not such a good idea to tell oth­
ers that they need to calm down or that they need to take some
time out. They may need the time, but it's hard to suggest it with­
out coming off as patronizing. "Take ten minutes, calm down,
and then get back to me." With others, get back to the source of
their anger. Retrace their Path to Action.
ENDLESS EXCUSES
"YEAH, MY TEENAGE SON is a master of excuses. I talk to him
BUT. .. about a problem, and he's always got a new reason
why it's not his fault."
The Danger Point
It's easy to be lulled into a series of never-ending excuses-par­
ticularly if the other person doesn't want to do what you've
asked and learns that as long as he or she can give you a plausi­
ble reason, all bets are off.
"I go to work before my son leaves for school, and he's con­
stantly late. First he told me that he was late because his
alarm broke. The next day the old car we bought him had
a problem-or so he says. Then his friend forgot to pick
him up. Then he had a hl!ad cold and couldn't hear his new
a I" 1'1ll. Thl!11 . . ."

=== Page 226 ===
208 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
The Solution
With "imaginative" people, take a preemptive strike against all new
excuses. Gain a commitment to solve the overall problem, not sim­
ply the stated cause. For instance, the first time the person is late,
seek a commitment to fix the alarm and anything else that might
-
stand in the way. Repairing the alarm only deals with one potential
cause. Ask the person to deal with the problem-being late.
"So you think that if you get a new alarm, you'll be able to
make it to school on time? That's fine with me. Do what­
ever it takes to get there on time. Can I count on you being
there tomorrow at eight o'clock sharp?"
Then remember, as the excuses accumulate, don't talk about the
most recent excuse; talk about the pattern.
INSUBORDINATION (OR OVER-THE-LINE DlSRESPEcn
IIYEAH, WHAT IF THE PEOPLE you talk to not only are angry. but
BUT. .. also become insubordinate? How do you handle that?"
The Danger Point
When you're discussing a tough issue with employees (or even
your kids), there's always the chance they'll step over the line.
They'll move from a friendly dispute to a heated discussion and
then into the nasty territory of being insubordinate or acting dis­
respectful.
The trouble is, insubordination is so rare that it takes most
leaders by surprise. So they buy time to figure out what to do.
And in so doing, they let the person get away with something
that was way out of line. Worse still, their perceived indifference
makes them an accomplice to all future abuses. Parents, on the

=== Page 227 ===
YEAH, BUT 209
other hand, caught by surprise, tend to respond in kind, becom­
ing angry and insulting.
The Solution
Show zero tolerance for insubordination. Speak up immediately,
but respectfully. Change topics from the issue at hand to how the
person is currently acting. Catch the escalating disrespect before
it turns into abuse and insubordination. Let the person know
that his or her passion for the issue at hand is leading down a
dangerous trail. "I'd like to step away from this scheduling issue
for a moment-then we'll come right back to it. The way you're
leaning in toward me and raising your voice seems disrespectful.
I want to help address your concerns, but I'm going to have a
tough time doing so if this continues."
If you can't catch it early, discuss the insubordination and seek
help from HR specialists.
REGRETTING SAYING SOMETHING HORRIBLE
nYEAH, SOMETIMES I LET A PROBLEM go for a long time, and
BUT. .. then when I bring it up, I say something just awful.
How do I recover from this?"
The Danger Point
When other people do things that bother us, and then we tell
ourselves a story about how they're bad and wrong, we're setting
ourselves up for an unhealthy conversation. Of course, when we
tell ourselves an ugly story and then sit on it, it only gets worse.
Stories left unattended don't get better with time-they ferment.
Then, when we eventually can't take it anymore, we say some­
thing we regret.

=== Page 228 ===
210 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
The Solution
First, don't repress your story. Use your STATE skills early on,
before the story turns too ugly. Second, if you have let the prob­
lem build, don't hold the crucial conversation while angry. Set
aside a time when you can discuss it in a calm fashion. Then,
using your STATE skills, explain what you've seen and heard,
and tentatively tell the most simple and least offensive story.
"The way you just told me that our neighbor thinks I'm a real
idiot has me worried. You smiled and laughed when you said it.
I'm beginning to wonder if you take pleasure in running to me
with negative feedback. Is that what's going on?"
If you do say something horrible-"You're cruel, you know
that? You love to hurt me and I'm sick of it"- apologize. You
can't uming the bell, but you can apologize. Then STATE Your
Path.
TOUCHY AND PERSONAL
IlYEAH, WHAT IF SOMEONE has a hygiene problem? Or maybe
BUT... someone's boring and people avoid him or her. How
could you ever talk about something personal and
sensitive like that?"
The Danger Point
Most people avoid sensitive issues like the plague. Who can blame
them? Unfortunately, when fear and misapplied compassion rule
over honesty and courage, people can go for years without being
given information that could be extremely helpful.
When people do speak up, they often leap from silence to vio­
lence. Jokes, nicknames, and other veiled attempts to sneak in
vague feedback are both indirect and disrespectful. Also, the

=== Page 229 ===
YEAH, BUT 211
longer you go without saying anything, the greater the pain when
you finally deliver the message.
The Solution
Use Contrasting. Explain that you don't want to hurt the person's
feelings, but you do want to share something that could be help­
ful. Establish Mutual Purpose. Let the other person know your
intentions are honorable. Also explain that you're reluctant to
bring up the issue because of its personal nature, but since the
problem is interfering with the person's effectiveness, you really
must. Tentatively describe the problem. Don't play it up or pile
it on. Describe the specific behaviors and then move to solu­
tions. Although these discussions are never easy, they certainly
don't have to be offensive or insulting.
WORD GAMES
'IYEAH, MY CHILDREN are constantly playing word games. If I
BUT. .. try to tell them that they shouldn't have done some­
thing, they say I never told them exactly that. They're
starting to get on my nerves."
The Danger Point
Sometimes parents (and leaders) are tricked into accepting poor
performance by silver-tongued individuals who are infinitely
creative in coming up with new ways to explain why they didn't
know any better. Not only do these inventive people have the
ability to conjure up creative excuses, but they also have the
energy and will to do so incessantly. Eventually they wear you
down. As a result, they get away with doing less or doing it

=== Page 230 ===
21 2 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
poorly, while hard-working, energetic family members (or employ­
ees) end up carrying an unfair share of the load.
The Solution
This is another case of pattern over instance. Tentatively STATE
the pattern of splitting hairs and playing word games. Let them
know they aren't fooling anyone. In this case, don't focus exclu­
sively on actions, because creative people can always find new
inappropriate actions. "You didn't say I couldn't call her 'stu­
pid.''' Talk about both behaviors and outcomes. "You're hurting
your sister's feelings when you call her stupid. Please don't do
that, or anything else that might hurt her feelings."
Use previous behavior as an example, and then hold them
accountable to results. Don't get pulled into discussing any one
instance. Stick with the pattern.
NO WARNING
YEA H, I'VE GOT A LOT OF GOOD people working for me, but
u
BUT... they're too full of surprises. When they run into prob­
lems, I only find out after it's too late. They always
have a good excuse, so what should I do?"
The Danger Point
Leaders who are constantly being surprised allow it to happen.
The first time an employee says, "Sorry, but I ran into a prob­
lem," the leaders miss the point. They listen to the problem,
work on it, and then move on to a new topic. In so doing, they
are saying: "It's okay to surprise me. If you have a legitimate
excuse, stop what you're doing, tum your efforts to something
else, and then wait until I show up to spring the news."

=== Page 231 ===
YEAH. BUT 21 3
The Solution
Make it perfectly clear that once you've given an assignment,
there are only two acceptable paths. Employees need to complete
the assignment as planned, or if they run into a problem, they
need to immediately inform you. No surprises. Similarly, if they
decide that another job needs to be done instead, they call you.
No surprises.
Clarify the "no surprises" rule. The first time someone comes
back with a legitimate excuse-but he or she didn't tell you
when the problem first came up-deal with this as the new prob­
lem. "We agreed that you'd let me know immediately. I didn't get
a call. What happened?"
DEALING WITH SOMEONE WHO BREAKS ALL THE RULES
"YEAH/ WHAT IF THE PERSON you're dealing with violates all of
BUT. .. the dialogue principles most of the time-especially
during crucial conversations."
The Danger Point
When you look at a continuum of dialogue skills, most of us (by
definition) fall in the middle. Sometimes we're on and some­
times we're off. Some of us are good at avoiding Sucker's
Choices; others are good at making it safe. Of course, you have
the extremes as well. You have people who are veritable conver­
sational geniuses. And now you're saying that you work with
(maybe live with) someone who is the complete opposite. He or
she rarely uses any skills. What's a person to do?
The danger, of course, is that the other person isn't as bad as
you think-you bring out the worst in him or her-or that he or
she really is that bad. and you try to address all the problems at
once.

=== Page 232 ===
214 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
The Solution
Let's assume this person is pretty bad all of the time and with
most everyone. Where do you start? Let's apply a metaphor here.
How do you eat an elephant? One bite at a time. Choose your
targets very carefully. Consider two dimensions: (1) What both­
ers you the most? "He or she is constantly assuming the worst
and telling horrible stories." (2) What might be the easiest to
work on? "He or she rarely shows any appreciation."
Look for those areas that are most grievous to you and might
not be all that hard to talk about. Pick one element and work on
it. Establish Mutual Purpose. Frame the conversation in a way
that the other person will care about.
"I love it when we're feeling friendly toward each other. I'd
like to have that feeling more frequently between us. There
are a couple of things I'd like to talk about that I'm pretty
convinced would help us with that. Can we talk?"
STATE the issue, and then work on that one issue. Don't nag;
don't take on everything at once. Deal with one element, one day
at a time.

=== Page 233 ===
1 2
To improve is to changei
to be petfoct is to change often.
-WINSTON CHURCHILL
Change Your Life
How to Turn Ideas into Habits
One day you "overhear" yourself enthusiastically talking about a
professional wrestling match. You're speaking with such gusto
that you give yourself the willies. You think to yourself: "You
know what? It's time to expand my cultural horizons." So you
vow to read more widely and to watch three programs on the sci­
ence channel for every episode of reality TV.
While you're at it, you commit to trimming down a bit as well.
A reasonable diet and moderate exercise program couldn't hurt.
To top it all off, you note that you're nearly consumed with your
work, so you swear to spend more time with your family.
More culture, better health, a stronger family-certainly you'll
quickly transform such worthy desires into daily habits.
Hardly. Changes of this sort are rarely easy. When it comes to
turning out· wispy hopl!s into concrete realities, our success rate

=== Page 234 ===
216 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
is mixed at best. This being the case, what are our chances of
improving something as deeply rooted in our psyches as the way
we communicate? Actually, it depends. There are a lot of vari­
ables that affect our chances. Consider the following factors.
SURPRISE
You've been asked to conduct your first meeting. To avoid
embarrassing yourself, you read a book where you learn all about
agendas, pacing, and the like. When it's time to lead your first
meeting, you arrive early, adjust the chairs, set the markers just
so, and lay out an agenda for each participant. As participants
arrive, you greet them cordially. Then you kick off the meeting
with a rousing icebreaker and you're off and running.
Implementing meeting skills is as easy as falling off a log.
That's because meetings are evident. You know when you're in
one. You're seated at a table along with a bunch of other people.
How could you not know you're in a meeting? They're also pre­
dictable. You can plan for them. You even have time to go over
underlined portions from the book.
Crucial conversations, in contrast, are far less evident. You
don't sit in a crucial conversations room. You don't pass around
a picture of your Path to Action. Instead you get thrown into a
heated discussion where you rarely think, "Oh yes, I'm in the
middle of a crucial conversation. That means I need to think
about all that stuff I read last week."
Discussions are also less predictable. Nobody sends you an
invitation stating: "Would you please engage me in a crucial con­
versation next week after the team meeting where you're going
to make a policy that will miff me?" High-risk discussions don't
come with notices and reminders. More often than not, they
come as unwelcome surprises.

=== Page 235 ===
CHANGE YOUR LIFE 217
EMOTION
Emotions don't help much either. And, of course, crucial con­
versations are defined by their emotional characteristics. Your
ability to pull yourself out of the content of a discussion and to
focus on the process is inversely proportional to your level of
emotion. The more you care about what's happening, the less
likely you are to think about how you're conducting yourself.
It's almost unfair. The bigger the deal, the less likely you are
to bring your newly acquired skill-set into the conversation. Like
it or not, if your adrenaline is flowing, you're almost guaranteed
to jump to your Style Under Stress.
Between surprise and emotion, it's hard to know which is the
bigger enemy of change. Both make it hard to remember to act
in new ways.
SCRIPTS
Now let's look at still another enemy of change-scripts. Scripts
are pre bundled phrases we use in common conversations; they
form the very foundation of social habits and often make change
almost impossible. Consider the following.
When we learn to speak, first come words, then phrases, and
then scripts. The larger the bundles of words we carry around, the
less we have to worry about combining them into sensible expres­
sions. Also the less we have to fret over syntax or grammar-that
work has already been done for us.
Unfortunately, predetermined expressions also put us into a
sort of mental autopilot. Consider what happens when you walk
into a fast-food restaurant. Do you think about the words you'll
choose? Probably not. That's because when you enter familiar
circumstances, you're carrying not only words and phrases, but
an entire script in your head.

=== Page 236 ===
218 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
With a script, you know both sides of the conversation. You
know that the person at the counter is going to ask for your
order. You're certain that the perky young woman with the paper
hat is going to ask you if you want fries. Even if you include fries
in your original request, she's still going to ask, "Do you want
fries with that?" And if you say yes, you can bet the farm that
she's going to ask, "Do you want to super-size that?"
The good news about packing around scripts is that you don't
have to give conversation much thought. The bad news is that
the more scripted an interaction, the more difficult it is to pull
yourself out of the routine and try something new. For example,
as you walk up to a fast-food counter, your spouse reminds you
to ask for extra ketchup.
You step up to the counter and say: "I'll have two house spe­
cials, three kiddy delights . . ." and then you slip into autopilot.
The words that pour out of your mouth have no relation to your
thoughts. Your brain is somewhere else entirely. You're musing
over a menu that sports a sandwich made out of "ribs" that have
no bones. "What poor animal has boneless ribs?" you're think­
ing to yourself.
And guess what? As you robotically state your order, one
word spilling out after another, you forget to ask for extra
ketchup. What do you expect from a person who's devoting no
real brain time to the interaction? In fact, your spouse's request
never even makes it onto your radar screen-which is currently
filled with images of Jell-O-like, ribless creatures mooing and
slithering across a backdrop painted by Salvador Dali.
Scripts place us on a smooth and familiar track. They take us
across known territory and at a comfortable pace-freeing our
brains for more novel work. But then again, when we're on rails,
we travel along the prescribed route with such finesse and ease
that it's almost impossible to make an unscheduled turn.

=== Page 237 ===
CHANGE YOUR LIFE 219
WHAT ARE OUR CHANCES?
So let's see what we're facing when we try to change our Style
Under Stress. Tough conversations come at us out of nowhere,
fill us with adrenaline, and evoke comfortable (but not neces­
sarily good) routines. They are spontaneous, emotional, and
backed by years of practice.
Consequently, when you examine people working through
crucial conversations, they look a lot more like racehorses charg­
ing out of the gate than human beings making choices. Conver­
sationalists are shocked into motion by surprise, whipped up to
speed by high stakes and strong emotions, and propelled along a
completely predictable course by scripts that offer few if any
options.
TRANSFER TIPS
Given the challenges of altering routine scripts, can people
actually change? Early in our research, we (the authors) once
examined forty-eight front-line supervisors who were learning
how to hold crucial conversations. As we watched the trainees
back at work, it became clear to us that only a few of them
transferred what they had learned in the classroom back to
their work site. The bad news is that most of them didn't
change an iota. The good news is that some of them did. In
fact, they used the new skills precisely as instructed.
The supervisors who found a way to apply the new skills
taught us the following four principles for turning ideas into
action:
• First, master the content. That means not only do you have
to be able to recognize what works and why, but you have to
generate new scripts of your own.

=== Page 238 ===
220 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
• Second, master the skills. You must be able to enact these new
scripts in a way that is consistent with the supporting princi­
ples. As it turns out, simply understanding a concept isn't
enough. While it's helpful, even necessary to talk the talk, you
have to be able to walk the talk. You have to be able to say the
right words with the right tone and nonverbal actions. When
it comes to social skills, knowing and doing are two different
animals.
• Third, enhance your motive. You must want to change. This
means that you have to care enough about improving your
crucial conversation skills to actually do something. You have
to move from a passive sense that it would be a good idea to
change, to an active desire to seek opportunities. Ability with­
out motive lies dormant and untapped.
• Fourth, watch for cues. To overcome surprise, emotion, and
scripts, you must recognize the call to action. This is usually
people's biggest obstacle to change. Old stimuli generate old
responses. If a problem doesn't cue your new skills, you'll return
to your old habits without even realizing you missed a chance to
try something new.
Master the Content
There's too much material in this book to try to master in one sit­
ting. Despite the fact that you may have read this book rather
quickly, a rapid once-over rarely generates much of a change in
behavior. You may have a feel for the content, but probably not
enough to propel you to change.
Here are some other steps you can take to help master the
content.

=== Page 239 ===
CHANGE YOUR LIFE 221
Do something. Years ago, Dale Carnegie recommended that
you read his now classic How to Win Friends and Influence
People one chapter at a time. Then, once you finished the chap­
ter, he suggested you go out and practice what you learned from
it. We agree. Pick a chapter you found relevant (possibly one
with a low score in your Style Under Stress test) and read it
again. This time, implement what you learned over a three- to
five-day period. Look for opportunities. Pounce on every chance
you get. Step up to the plate and give the skills a try. Then pick
another chapter and repeat the process.
Discuss the material. When you first learn something, your
knowledge is "preverbal." That is, you might recognize the con­
cepts if you see them, but you're not able to discuss them with
ease. You haven't talked about them enough to make them part
of your functional vocabulary. You haven't turned the words
into phrases and the phrases into scripts. To move your knowl­
edge to the next level, read a chapter and then discuss it with a
friend or loved one. Talk about the material until the concepts
come naturally.
Teach the material. If you really want to master a concept,
teach it to someone else. Stick with it until the other person
understands the concept well enough to pass it on to someone
else.
Master the Skills
There's a story going around the self-help talk circuit about a
Vietnam War prisoner who played golf in his head in order to
help maintain his sanity. He'd mentally step up to each hole at
his favorite golf course and "play" an entire round. After being
released, he eventually found his way to the course, where he
promptly shot his best score ever, one under par. When his
friends acted astonished at his new-found talent, he explained,

=== Page 240 ===
222 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
"Why shouldn't I have shot under par? I never once shot over
par while I was in prison."
This tale is routinely used to teach the power of mental prepa­
ration. Gurus can't say enough about the power of the mental
game. While we agree that thinking is an essential part of the
process, we'd like to emphasize the greater importance of doing.
Evidence suggests that mental preparation can make some dif­
ference in execution, but thinking isn't enough. If you really want
to improve your ability, practice. Step up to problems and give
the material a try.
Rehearse with a friend. Start by rehearsing with a friend. Ask
a colleague or coworker to partner with you. Explain that you'd
like to practice the skills you're learning. Briefly discuss the skill
you'll be attempting. Provide the details of a real problem you're
facing. (Don't include names or otherwise violate privacy
issues.) Next, ask your friend to play the role of the other person
and practice the crucial conversation.
Ask your partner to give you honest feedback. Otherwise you
could be practicing the wrong delivery. Remember, practice
doesn't make perfect; perfect practice makes perfect. Insist that
your practice partner hold you to a high standard. Make sure
you're constantly improving.
Practice on the fly. You're going to be holding crucial conver­
sations at home and at work, or you wouldn't have bought this
book in the first place. So practice the skills you've been read­
ing, teaching, and rehearsing. If you have children, hardly a day
will pass that you won't have a chance to practice.
Start immediately. If you wait until you're perfect before you
give something a try, you could be waiting a long time. To make
it safe, pick a conversation of only medium risk. Trying out
something new is hard enough without applying it to a monu­
mental problem.

=== Page 241 ===
CHANGE YOUR LIFE 223
Practice in a training session. For those of you who would like
more material and practice opportunities than you can extract
from a book and other static materials, attend one of our live
training seminars. Give us a call and see if you can either sched­
ule a session at a location near you or bring the training into your
company.
Our training materials library is equipped with a variety of
delivery tools ranging from leader-guided workshops to off-site
intensive courses.
Enhance Your Motive
We all have ideas about how to motivate others, but how do you
motivate yourself? While you may feel 100 percent committed to
improving your crucial conversations right now, what can you do
when you're staring at an angry coworker and your commitment
to improVIDent drops to, say, 10 percent?
The truth is that we often need to take steps to ensure that our
most well-founded wishes (those made during peaceful moments
where we're taking an honest look at the future) survive turbu­
lent, less forward-looking circumstances.
Apply incentives. Start with the obvious. Use incentives. For
example, people going through self-help courses are often
encouraged to put their money where their mouth is. Every time
they fulfill an assignment, they're given back a portion of their
tuition. On the other hand, if they don't step up, it costs them.
When incentives are added, results improve fairly dramatically.
So every time you deftly hold a crucial conversation, celebrate
your victory. Treat yourself to something you wouldn't otherwise
enjoy. And don't wait for perfection. Celebrate improvement. If
you used to get in a heated argument every time you brought up
a cel-tain problem. and now the interaction is merely tense, enjoy

=== Page 242 ===
224 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
the victory. Self-improvement is achieved by individuals who
appreciate direction more than those who demand perfection.
Apply disincentives. You might consider disincentives as well.
Take a look at what went on at Stanford a few years back.
Subjects who were trying to lose weight were asked to write a
donation check to an organization they despised. These checks
were then set aside, never to be mailed unless the subjects failed
to live up to their goals-at which point five hundred dollars
was sent to Americans for Nuclear Proliferation or something
equally distasteful to the subject. As predicted, subjects did bet­
ter when they used disincentives.l
Go pUblic. Let others know that you're trying to routinely
hold crucial conversations. Explain what you're doing and why.
Over half a century ago, Dr. Kurt Lewin, the father of social psy­
chology, learned that when subjects made a public commitment
to do something, they were more likely to stay the course than if
they kept their wishes to themselves.2 Tell people what your
goals are. Get social pressure working in your favor.
Talk with your boss. If you want to take it a step further, sit
down with your boss and explain your goals. Ask for his or her
support. If you want to put some real teeth into your goal, build
your plan into your performance review. As a leader, you're almost
always asked to pick one "soft area" listed on your performance
review forms and work on it. Select dialogue. You might as well
tie your plans for improvement into the formal reward system.
Align your personal, family, and organizational goals to a single
goal-improving your dialogue skills.
Remember the costs; focus on the reward. Perhaps the most
predictive piece of social science research ever conducted was
completed with small children and marshmallows. A child was
put in a room and then told that he or she could have either one
marshmallow now or two if he or she was willing to wait until
the adult returned in a few minutes. The adult would then place

=== Page 243 ===
CHANGE YOUR LIFE 225
one marshmallow in front of the child and exit. Some of the chil­
dren delayed gratification. Others ate the marshmallow right
away. Researchers continued studying these children.
Over the next several decades, the children who had delayed
gratification ended up doing far better in life than those who
hadn't. They had stronger marriages, made more money, and
were healthier.3 This willingness to do without now in order to
achieve more later turns out to be an all-purpose tool for success.
How did the children who were able to delay gratification
fight off their short-term wishes? First, they looked away from
the scrumptious marshmallow that sat in front of them. No use
torturing themselves with the vision of what they couldn't have.
Second, they kept telling themselves that if they waited, they
would get two, not one. What could be simpler?
As you step up to a crucial conversation and wonder if it's
really worth trying out something new and untested, remind
yourself why you're trying new skills in the first place. Focus on
improved results. Remember what happens when you fall back
on your old methods.
Think "things." How can things help motivate you? Actually,
this particular concept isn't easy to grasp. An example might
help. You're unsuccessfully trying to lose weight. It turns out
that your early-morning iron will turns into midday rubber as
your stomach begins to growl and you sniff the air of the restau­
rant you frequent for lunch. What can you do with things to help
keep you on track?
Pack a sensible lunch first thing in the morning when your will
is strong. Take no money with you. That way it won't be easy to
cave in to your weaker, afternoon wishes. By structuring around
your self-control cycles, you heighten the power of your stronger
motives while lessening the blow of you weaker moments.
Schedule crucial conversations when you're feeling confident.
Practice befurehHnd. Take nutes. Set up your office the way you

=== Page 244 ===
226 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
would like. Anned with smart timing and material support,
you're far more likely to step up to tough problems effectively.
Build in Cues
To remind yourself to use your new skills, create helpful cues.
Mark hot spots. People who go through stress-reduction train­
ing learn to mark physical items that are closely linked to their
sources of tension. People who freak out in traffic put a small red
circle on their steering wheel. Individuals who are constantly in
a rush put one on their watch.
When it comes to the tough conversations you face, you might
want to make use of small visual cues as well. Place one on the
computer that spits out results that drive you nuts. Build a cue
into your copy of the agenda of any meeting that typically serves
up tough problems.
Set aside a time. Perhaps the best way to remind yourself to
use your new skills is to set aside a time each day to walk around
in search of both successes and problems. When you see a suc­
cess, celebrate. When you encounter a problem, bring your best
dialogue tools into play.
Read reactions. If you're not doing a good job of holding cru­
cial conversations, the results are going to be right in front of
you. If you see that you're getting off track, back up and start
over. Use real-life cues (e.g., the other person's jaw tenses, he or
she clams up, etc.) to remind yourself that maybe it's time to try
a new tactic. If necessary, apologize. Move to an earlier place in
the discussion and follow the process.
Build in permanent reminders. Order a poster of the model,
place it on the wall, and look at it each morning as you start the day.
Carry a reminder. Along with the poster, order a set of cue
cards you can tuck into your purse or shirt pocket.

=== Page 245 ===
CHANGE YOUR LIFE 227
A DIGITAL ASSIST
We've tried to include in this book everything you'll need to con­
duct crucial conversations. Our goal was to provide a complete,
stand-alone tool for personal change. Nevertheless, when it
comes to improving social interactions, the digital domain has a
lot to offer as well. Audio, video, and other digital tools can
enhance your learning experience.
As an additional resource, we invite you to our website. There
you'll find a variety of tools for helping you transform the printed
word into daily actions. Digital tools include conceptual, behav­
ioral, and cuing tools.
Conceptual Tools
Watch. To give you live-action views of the skills we cover, we've
added video examples to our website. Visit us at ww.wcrucial­
conversations.com and check out video clips for specific skills.
Listen. Many people enjoy listening to audiotapes or CDs as
they commute to and from work each day. We've put together an
audio mastery course that not only reviews the material chapter
by chapter, but also provides audio examples of what the skills
sound like when put into action. Move your knowledge from the
abstract to the concrete as you hear how the theories translate
into words and the words build into usable scripts.
Behavioral Tools
If you'd like to practice specific skills with the aid of a role-play
tool, go to our website and check out Free Resources to down­
load role-play rehearsals. Print out the role plays and then work
with a partner until you've mastered the skill.

=== Page 246 ===
228 CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS
Cuing Tools
Visit ww.wcrucia1conversations.com to sign up for regular tips,
reminders, and other resources to keep you watching for oppor­
tunities to use your crucial conversations skills.
A PARTING THOUGHT
We'll be forever indebted to the wonderful people who allowed
us to roll up our sleeves, work side by side with them, and study
their best practices. We're particularly grateful to individuals
who allowed us to watch them as they struggled to work through
crucial conversations. It's hard enough to sort out facts, stories,
and feelings without being scrutinized under a microscope while
you're doing it.
We hope that by sharing the theories, skills, and models we've
learned from these dear friends and colleagues, we'll help you
feel more comfortable stepping up to your own crucial conver­
sations. You'll be able to add to the pool of available meaning,
make better decisions, and work in a way that both gets the job
done and enhances your relationships.
So we encourage you to pick a relationship. Pick a conversa­
tion. Let others know that you're trying to do better, then give
it a shot. When you blow it, admit it. Don't expect perfection;
aim for progress. And when you succeed, celebrate your suc­
cess. We hope you'll take pleasure in knowing that you're
improving and so are your relationships. Finally, when the
chance arises, help others do the same. Help friends, loved
ones, and coworkers learn to master their own high-stakes dis­
cussions. Help strengthen organizations, solidify families, heal
communities, and shore up nations one person-one crucial
conversation-at a time.

=== Page 247 ===
Endnotes
CHAPTER 1
1. Hermann Simon, Hidden Champions: Lessons from 500 of the World's
Best Unknown Companies (Boston: Harvard Business School Press,
1996), 195.
2. Clifford Notarius and Howard Markman, We Can Work It Out: Making
Sense of Marital Conflict (New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons, 1993),20-22,
37-38.
3. Allen Beck et ai., Survey of State Prison Inmates, 1991 (Washington,
DC: U.S. Department of Justice, 1993), 3-5, 6, 11, 13, 16.
4. Dean amish, Love and Survival: The Healing Power of Intimacy (New
York: HarperCollins Publishers, 1998), 63.
5. amish, Love and Survival: The Healing Power of Intimacy, 54-56.
CHAPTER 2:
1. Olivia Barker, "4 Studies Aim to Reduce, Resolve Medical Mistakes,"
USA Today, Dec. 8, 1999.
CHAPTER 6
1. The Arbinger Institute, Leadership and Selfdeception: Getting out of the
Box (San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler, June 2000), 72-74.
CHAPTER 12
1. Sydnor B. Penick, R. Filion, S. Ross Fox, Albert Stunkard, "Behavior
Modification in the treatment of Obesity," Psychosomatic Medicine 33
(1971): 49-55.
2. Elliot Aronson, The Social Animal (New York: W.H. Freeman & Co.,
1984), 25.
3. Yuichi Shoda, Walter Mischel, and Philip K. Peake, "Predicting adoles­
cent cognitive and self-regulatory competencies from preschool delay of
gratification," Developmental Psychology 26 (1990): 978-86.

=== Page 249 ===
Index
Action, moving to: Behavior (Cont,):
decisions leading to, 161-178, 185, controlling, 53, 61
188, 192 dialogue model, 182-185
lack of initiative, 204-205 harassment, 194-195
(See also Path to Action) insubordination, 208-209
Adrenaline, 4, 35 mirroring, 149-150
Agreements: motives, denoting, 42
failure to keep, 197-198 observing, 48-49, 67-68, 105
resolving differences, 82-88, overly sensitive persons, 196
156-158, 188 path to, 95, 102-112, 117
Allen, Woody, 27 patterns, 204-206, 207-208, 211-212
Anger, 206-207, 209-210 self-defeating strategies, 6-7
Apologies: self-monitoring, 55-63
contrasting, 79 Blame, 29
exploring others' paths, 155 Body language:
regrettable statements, 210 mirroring, 149-150
restoring safety, 76, 92 Mutual Respect, 71-72
Archimedes, 17 Building on agreement, 157-158, 188
Arguments, 12-13,65, 156-158, 188 Butler, Samuel, 23
Asking others' opinions, 131, 141-159,
185, 187, 190 Career improvement, 9-10
Assignments, follow up, 176-178, 185, Carnegie, Dale, 221
188, 192, 204-2- 05 Choices:
Attacking, 54, 61, 182-185 clarifying, 40-43
Audio dialogue learning tools, 227 command decisions, 168-169
Authority: consensus decisions, 171-173
decision making, 163-164 distasteful, 37-41, 108-109,
overly deferential persons, 198-200 114-115, 120-121, 122
A voidance behavior: important, 27
dialogue model, 182-185 learning tools for, 184, 186
difficult situation, 201-202 voting decisions, 170-171
silence strategy, 2-3, 37, 52, 61 Churchill, Winston, 215
City Slickers (film), 20
Behavior: Command decisions, 165, 168-169, 178
nggrcssiVl', 50-'j I Commitment:
uVoiduI1l'l', 2 i, n, '1.1, hi, 101 .1()2 JcciHion making, 167

=== Page 250 ===
232 INDEX
Commitment (Cont.): Empathy, 72-74, 142-156
Mutual Purpose, 83-84, 87, 92 Excuses, 207-208, 211-212
public, 224 Expectations:
Communities, 13-14 failing to keep agreements, 198
Comparisons in disagreements, 158, 188 lack of initiative, 204-205
Conditions of conversations, 45-63 putting decisions into action,
Confidence, 121, 129 175-176, 178
Consensus, 166, 171-173, 178
Consultation, 165-166, 169-170, 178 Facts:
Content of conversations: interpretations, 105, 117, 203
about, 46, 66-68, 88, 183 resolving differences, 156-158
overly sensitive persons, 196 retracing Path to Action, 102
Context of conversations, 79-80 sharing, 124-135, 140, 187
Contrasting for misinterpretation: useful stories, 112-115
overly sensitive persons, 196 Fear (See Safety)
personal observations, 211 Follow up to assignments, 176-178,
safety, 76-82, 88,89,92, 130-131 185, 188, 192,204-205
Control, limits on, 29-30, 42 Fuller, Thomas, 193
Controlling behavior, 53, 61, 182-185
Conversations (See specific topics) Glaser, Ronald, 15
Cooperation, 167 Goals:
Crime, 14 determining, 27-43, 184, 186, 189
Cues for dialogue skills, 226 learning dialogue skills, 223-226
Curiosity, 143-145, 159 Groundhog Day (film), 205
Decisions: Harassment, 194-195
acting upon, 174-178, 185, 188 Health, personal, 15-16
making, 162-174, 185, 188 HeltJless Stories, 108-109, 114-115,
Defensiveness, 196 118
Devil's advocate, playing, 135, 199-200 Honesty:
Dialogue skills: motives, 30-33
about, 20-26 observations, 210-211
consultation decisions, 169-170 (See also Sucker's Choices)
improving one's own, 27-43 How to Win Friends and Influence
lack of, 213-214 People (Carnegie), 221
learning tools, 179-192, 215-228 Humanization of others, 113-114
Difficult situations, 193-214 Humility, 121-122, 131
Disagreements, resolving, 82-88,
156-158, 188 Immune systems, 15-16
Diseases, life-threatening, 15-16 Improvement of dialogue skills and con
Documenting work, 177, 178, 188, 192 versation, 27-43
clarifying choices in, 27, 40-43
Emotions: limits on control, 29-30, 42
crucial conversations, 2, 4, 48-49 motivation for, 30-43
learning dialogue skills, 217, 220 Influence, personal, 17-20
mastering, 93-118 Information:
Mutual Respect, 71-72 free flow, 20-23
retracing path, 102, 117, 184 resolving differences, 157-158
safety problems, 49-51 Initiative, lack or, 203-205
strong beliefs, 136-140 Insubordination, 20H-209

=== Page 251 ===
INDEX 233
Intent, 68-70, 76-82, 108, 211 Opinions (Cont,):
Internet for learning tools, 227-228 strong beliefs, 136-140
(See also Talking tentatively)
Jerry Springer Show (television Options (See Choices)
program), 14 Organizational success, 10-12
Johnson, Samuel, 161 Ouida,45
Kellogg, Marjorie, 65 Paraphrasing, 150-151, 155, 159, 185,
Kiecolt-Glaser, Janice, 15 187, 190
Parker, Dorothy, 119
Labeling, 53-54, 61, 108, 182-185 Parkinson, C. Northcote, 1
Learning dialogue skills, 179-192, Path to Action:
215-228 about, 98-99
Lewin, Kurt, 224 difficult situations, 123-135, 140,203
Limits on control, 29-30, 42 harassment, 195
Listening skills, 141-159 others', 141-159, 190-192
retracing, 102-112, 117, 184, 187,
Markman, Howard, 12-13 190
Masking, 52, 61, 67, 182-185 Patience, 145, 159,202
Maslow, Abraham, 171-172 Patterns of behavior, 204-206, 207-208,
Mirroring, 149-150, 155, 159, 185, 211-212
187, 190 Performance reviews, 224
Models of dialogue skills, 182-185 Persuasion with facts, 126-127, 140
Motives: Physical reactions:
clever stories, 107, 108 adrenaline, 4, 35
learning dialogue skills, 220, observing, 48-49, 226
223-226 Pool of Shared Meaning:
others', 98, 154 about, 21-25
own, 30-37 dialogue model, 182-185
Murray, Bill, 205 listening to others, 141-159
Mutual Purpose: risky information, 119-140
avoidance behavior, 202 silence, 51
dialogue learning tools, 187, 189 violence, 53
difficult personal situations, 211 Powell, John, 179
harassment, 195 Practicing dialogue skills, 222-223, 226,
inventing, 85-86, 87, 92 228
lack of dialogue skills, 214 Priming, 151-153, 155, 159, 185, 187,
safety, 68-70, 76-92 190
Mutual Respect: Productivity, 10, 11
dialogue learning tools, 187 Purpose:
safety, 71-74, 76-92 different, 82-88
Mutual (See Mutual Purpose)
Notarius, Clifford, 12-13
Quality, 11
Objects, using to learn dialogue skills,
225-226 Regrets, 209-210
Online fuJ' lcw'ning louis, 227-228 Rehearsal of dialogue skills, 222
Opiniuns: Relationships, 12-13, 68-74, 195-196
othCJ'H·. I) I. 141 l'llJ. I HI). 187. 190 Respect:
silurinR. I. 21 harassment, 194-195

=== Page 252 ===
234 INDEX
Respect (Cont.): Sucker's Choices (Cont.):
lack of, 208-209 Helpless Stories, 114-115
Mutual, 71-74, 76-92, 187 and honesty, 30-33, 210-211
Revenge, 37 learning tools, 184, 186
Rusk, Dean, 141 Surprises, 5, 193-194,212-213,216,
220
Safety:
avoidance behavior, 201 Talking tentatively:
failure, 37, 65-74 avoidance behavior, 201
learning dialogue skills, 180-192 opinions, 131-135, 136, 140, 187
listening to others, 142, 143, 148 overly sensitive persons, 196
organizational skills, 11 personal observations, 211
overly sensitive persons, 196 regrettable statements, 210
Pool of Shared Meaning, 21 Time constraints:
priming, as listening tool, 151-153 decision making, 1 73-174
restoring, 74-92 taking action, 176, 178, 188, 192
risky topics, 121-123, 130-131 Time-outs, 207
watching for problems, 49-54 Timing:
Scripts for dialogue skills, 217-220 conversations becoming crucial,
Self-awareness: 48-49
interpreting observations, 93-118 insubordination, handling, 209
overly deferential persons, 199 mastering stories, 100, 102
rari ty of, 45 Tone of voice, 149-150
strong beliefs, 138-140 Tools:
Style Under Stress, 56-62 audio dialogue learning tools,227
Self-justification, 106-112 for learning dialogue skills,
Sellouts, 109-112 179-192,215-228
Sensitivity to others, 195-196, 210-211 priming, as listening tool,
Sexual harassment, 194-195 151-153
Shakespeare, William, 99 video dialogue learning tools, 227
Silence: website for learning tools,
about, 51-53, 61 227-228
dialogue model, 182-185 Topics of crucial conversations:
overly sensitive persons, 195-196 common, 7-8
strong beliefs, 137 difficult, 119-140
watching for, 102, 117, 141-142, organizational, 11-12
180-181 Trust, failed, 200-201
Sincerity, 143, 148
Speaking skills, 119-140, 187,149-150 Vague situations, 202-203
Stories: Victim Stories:
mastering, 93-118, 184, 190 about, 106-107, 118
overly sensitive persons, 196 behavior patterns, 204, 205-206,
regrettable statements, 210 207-208
retracing Path to Action, 102, 117, useful stories, 112-113
184, 187, 190 Video dialogue learning tools,
telling, 128-131, 140, 187, 190 227
Stress, Style Under, 56-62, 182-183 Villain Stories:
Sucker's Choices: about, 107-108, 118
about, 37-41, 43, 108-109 failed trust, 20 I
difficult topics, 120-121, 122 harassment, I q4

=== Page 253 ===
INDEX 235
Villain Stories (Cont.): Website for learning tools,
Helpless Stories, 109 227-228
useful stories, 113-114 Winning, 36, 136-140, 170-171
Violence: Withdrawal, 52-53, 61, 182-185,
about, 51, 53-54, 61, 141-142 201-202
dialogue model, 182-185 Words:
strong beliefs, 137 emotional, 103-104
watching for, 102, 117, 180-181 judgmental, 105-106
Vocabulary (See Words) mirroring, 149-150
Voting, 166, 170-171, 178 word games, 211-212

=== Page 255 ===
About the Authors
Kerry Patterson (kp@vitalsmarts.com) began his research into the
challenges of developing and maintaining healthy organizations
during his doctoral work at Stanford University. He has taught at
the Graduate School of Management at Brigham Young
University, and for over two decades has worked as a consultant
on extensive culture-change projects. His award-winning, video­
based training programs have been used successfully by hundreds
of the Fortune 500 companies. Among his many clients are Ford
Motor Company, Allstate, and Intermountain Health Care.
Joseph Grenny (jg@vitalsmarts.com) cofounded California
Computer Corporation. He also cofounded Unitus, a nonprofit
organization that helps the third-world poor achieve economic
self-reliance. He has taught and coached thousands of corporate
and government leaders around the world. In the past seventeen
years he has designed and implemented major change initiatives
for numerous clients including IBM, AT&T, Lockheed Martin,
the state of California, and Columbia HealthCare.
Ron McMillan (rm@vitalsmarts.com) holds advanced degrees in
sociology and organizational behavior. He cofounded Covey
Leadership Center and was vice president of research and devel­
opment foJ' seven years. He serves on the board of directors of
Amcl'icull Fumily Institute. For over twenty-five years, he has

=== Page 256 ===
238 ABOUTTHE AUTHORS
worked with a variety of groups, ranging from unions and first­
level managers to CEOs and corporate executives, on topics
including team development, personal vitality, and leadership.
His clients include the Saturn Division of GM, Procter &
Gamble, Disney, Aetna, Nike, and Lennox.
Al Switzler (as@vitalsmarts.com) is on the faculty at the Exec­
utive Development Center at the University of Michigan.
Previously, he has taught at Auburn University, the University of
Kentucky, and the Graduate School of Management at Brigham
Young University. He has served as president of two consulting
firms, vice president of marketing for an information firm, and
director of training and management development for a health­
care company. He has worked with hundreds of clients, including
Key Bank, Philips Electronics, the U.S. Department of Energy,
and aGE Energy Corp.
The authors founded VitalSmarts (1990), coauthored The Bal­
ancing Act; Mastering the Competing Demands of Leadership
(1996), and have codeveloped dozens of training programs.

=== Page 257 ===
About Vita/Smarts
For twenty-five years, the authors have been helping individuals,
teams, and organizations improve the way they approach their
crucial conversations. They have worked with union, corporate,
and government leaders as well as front-line employees in hun­
dreds of organizations-including over three hundred of the
Fortune 500 companies. These experiences have consistently led
to significant, rapid, and measurable improvement in results.
Through these experiences the authors have developed a variety
of proven resources that can help you master your crucial conver­
sations. They include:
Video illustrations of skills
•
Assessment of personal, team, and organizational crucial
•
conversation skills
Multimedia newsletter that describes best practices, applica-
•
tions, and fun tips
Audio Mastery Course
•
Self-study course for teams, couples, and small businesses
•
Reminders and cues
•
Live web trainings with authors
•

=== Page 258 ===
240 ABOUT VITALSMARTS
Public training courses and special events
•
In-house training and certification
•
Retreats and keynotes
•
e-training
•
To inquire about these and other resources and solutions,
contact us at:
www.crucialconversations.com
1-800-449-5989
We'd like to hear about your attempts to improve your crucial
conversations. Visit us at www.crucia1conversations.com and
share what you've done. Your example can help others and may
be included in an upcoming publication.
