=== Page 2 ===
HTW_fm01.qxp 8/22/08 8:52 AM Page ii

=== Page 3 ===
HWC_IFC.qxp 7/29/08 7:51 AM Page 101
The Five-Way Access System
The five-way access system of the Handbook of Technical Writing
provides readers with multiple ways of retrieving information:
1.Alphabetically Organized Entries
The alphabetically organized entries with color tabs enable
readers to find information quickly. Within the entries, terms
shown as links refer to other entries that contain definitions of
key concepts or further information on related topics.
2.Contents by Topic
The complete Contents by Topic, on the inside front cover,
groups the entries into categories and serves as a quick refer-
ence for finding all topics covered in the book. The Contents
by Topic allows a writer focusing on a specific task or problem
to locate helpful entries; it is also useful for instructors who
want to correlate the Handbook with standard textbooks or
their own course materials. The list of Commonly Misused
Words and Phrases extends this topical key by listing all the
usage entries in the book.
3.Checklistof the Writing Process
The Checklist helps readers to reference all writing-process-
related entries.
4.Comprehensive Index
The Index lists all the topics covered in the book, including
subtopics within the main entries in the alphabetical arrange-
ment.
5.Model Documents and Figures by Topic
The list of Model Documents and Figures by Topic, on the in-
side back cover, makes it easier to find the abundant “real-
world” examples and sample documents throughout the text
that provide models for effective technical communication.

=== Page 4 ===
HWC_IFC.qxp 7/29/08 7:51 AM Page 102
Contents by Topic
Use this list as a quick reference for finding entries by topic. To search
this book in more detail, see the Index.
Technical Writing Documents Graphs 235
Maps 319
and Elements
Mathematical Equations 320
Brochures 54 Organizational Charts 362
Description 120 Photographs 377
Tables 519
Environmental Impact Statements 174
Web Design 561
FAQs (Frequently Asked
Questions) 183
Correspondence
Forms 218
Indexing 250 Acknowledgment Letters 11
Instructions 258 Adjustment Letters 14
Job Descriptions 285 Complaint Letters 87
Manuals 315 Correspondence 102
Mathematical Equations 320 Cover Letters 111
Newsletter Articles 341 E-mail 162
Newsletters 343 Inquiries and Responses 253
Process Explanation 401 Instant Messaging 256
Proposals 412 International Correspondence 265
Requests for Proposals 456 Letters 301
Questionnaires 437 Memos 328
Report Components Reference Letters 449
Abstracts 7 Refusal Letters 449
Appendixes 34
Conclusions 93 Job Search and Application
Executive Summaries 181
Glossaries 233 Acceptance/Refusal Letters
Introductions 276 (for Employment) 9
Tables of Contents 519 Application Letters 35
Titles 529 Interviewing for a Job 272
Reports 454
Job Search 286
Feasibility Reports 185
Resignation Letters 467
Formal Reports 195
Résumés 471
Investigative Reports 281
Laboratory Reports 293 Salary Negotiations 491
Progress and Activity Reports 402
Test Reports 527 Presentations and Meetings
Trip Reports 539
Listening 307
Trouble Reports 541
Specifications 510 Meetings 323
Trade Journal Articles 533 Minutes of Meetings 332
Literature Reviews 310 Presentations 391
Usability Testing 543
White Papers 565 Research and Documentation
Writing for the Web 570 Bibliographies 48
Brainstorming 53
Copyright 101
Design and Visuals
Documenting Sources 129
Layout and Design 295 Interviewing for Information 270
Forms 218 Literature Reviews 310
Headers and Footers 241 Note-Taking 347
Headings 242
Paraphrasing 372
Lists 309
Plagiarism 383
Visuals 552
Drawings 154 Questionnaires 437
Flowcharts 192 Quotations 445
Global Graphics 230 Research 449

=== Page 5 ===
HWC_IFC.qxp 7/29/08 7:51 AM Page 103
Organization,Writing, Articles 39
and Revision Biased Language 46
Clauses 70
Blogs 49 Comma Splice 77
Collaborative Writing 72 Commas 77
Content Management 97 Double Negatives 153
Description 120 English as a Second Language 169
Ethics in Writing 177 Gender 226
Exposition 182 Idioms 248
Global Communication 228 Mood 336
Logic Errors 312 Nouns 349
Methods of Development 329 Number (Grammar) 351
Cause-and-Effect 66 Numbers 352
Chronological 68
Periods 375
Comparison 85
Phrases 380
Definition 117
Division-and-Classification 126 Plagiarism 383
General and Specific 227 Point of View 385
Order-of-Importance 358 Possessive Case 387
Sequential 507 Prepositions 390
Spatial 510 Pronouns 405
Narration 339 Quotation Marks 443
Organization 361 Run-on Sentences 490
Outlining 362 Sentence Construction 498
Persuasion 377 Sentence Fragments 504
Preparation 389 Spelling 512
Audience 42 Style 513
Brainstorming 53
Syntax 518
Context 98
Tense 523
Purpose 435
Readers 448 Transition 537
Scope 493 Verbals 546
Selecting the Medium 494 Verbs 549
Proofreading 411 Voice 557
Repurposing 455
Revision 488
ESL Tips
Writing a Draft 569
Assigning Gender 226
Digital Tips Avoiding Shifts in Voice, Mood,
or Tense 551
Conducting Meetings from Remote
Choosing Voice 560
Locations 324
Determining Mood 337
Creating an Index 252
Punctuating Numbers 354
Creating an Outline 365
Stating an Opinion 386
Creating Styles and Templates 200
Understanding the Requirements
Incorporating Tracked Changes 489
of a Sentence 502
Leaving an Away-from-Desk
Understanding the Subject
Message 166
of a Sentence 499
Preparing an ASCII Résumé 487
Using Adjectives 15
Proofreading for Format
Using Articles 40
Consistency 412
Using Possessive Pronouns 407
Reviewing Collaborative
Using the Progressive Form 526
Documents 74
Sending an E-mail Attachment 164
Testing Your Web Site 562 Style and Language
Using PDF Files 574
Style 513
Wikis for Collaborative Documents 72
Affectation 22
Allusions 30
ESL Trouble Spots Ambiguity 32
Awkwardness 44
Adjectives 12 Biased Language 46
Agreement 23 Clarity 68

=== Page 6 ===
HTW_fm01.qxp 8/22/08 8:52 AM Page i
Style (cont.) Sentence Fragments 504
Clichés 71 Paragraphs 367
Comparison 84 Coherence 71
Conciseness 90 Transition 537
Contractions 101 Unity 543
Defining Terms 116
Direct Address 126
Parts of Speech and Grammar
Double Negatives 153
Emphasis 167 Grammar 234
English, Varieties of 173 Agreement 23
Euphemisms 180 Case 62
Expletives 182 English as a Second Language 169
Figures of Speech 189 Gender 226
Gobbledygook 233 Mood 336
Idioms 248 Number (Grammar) 351
Intensifiers 264 Person 376
Jargon 285 Possessive Case 387
Nominalizations 346 Pronoun Reference 405
Pace 367 Tense 523
Parallel Structure 370 Voice 557
Point of View 385 Parts of Speech 374
Positive Writing 386
Adjectives 12
Repetition 453
Adverbs 19
Rhetorical Questions 490
Articles 39
Sentence Variety 505
Conjunctions 95
Subordination 516
Functional Shift 224
Technical Writing Style 521
Interjections 264
Telegraphic Style 522
Nouns 349
Tone 532
Prepositions 390
“You” Viewpoint 575
Pronouns 405
Word Choice 568
Verbals 546
Abstract / Concrete Words 6 Verbs 549
Antonyms 33
Buzzwords 57
Connotation / Denotation 96 Punctuation and Mechanics
Dictionaries 123
Mechanics
Foreign Words in English 194
Functional Shift 224 Abbreviations 2
Malapropisms 315 Acronyms and Initialisms 11
Synonyms 518 Ampersands 33
Thesaurus 529 Capitalization 59
Vague Words 546 Compound Words 90
Contractions 101
Dates 115
Usage
Italics 283
See page 545. Numbers 352
Prefixes 389
Sentences and Paragraphs Proofreaders’ Marks 410
Proofreading 411
Sentence Construction 498 Spelling 512
Appositives 39 Suffixes 517
Clauses 70 Punctuation 434
Complements 88 Apostrophes 34
Expletives 182 Brackets 52
Modifiers 334 Colons 75
Objects 356 Commas 77
Phrases 380 Dashes 114
Restrictive and Nonrestrictive Ellipses 161
Elements 470 Exclamation Marks 180
Syntax 518 Hyphens 245
Sentence Faults 503 Parentheses 373
Comma Splice 77 Periods 375
Dangling Modifiers 113 Question Marks 436
Garbled Sentences 225 Quotation Marks 443
Mixed Constructions 334 Semicolons 497
Run-on Sentences 490 Slashes 508

=== Page 7 ===
HWC_IFC.qxp 7/29/08 7:51 AM Page 101
The Five-Way Access System
The five-way access system of the Handbook of Technical Writing
provides readers with multiple ways of retrieving information:
1.Alphabetically Organized Entries
The alphabetically organized entries with color tabs enable
readers to find information quickly. Within the entries, terms
shown as links refer to other entries that contain definitions of
key concepts or further information on related topics.
2.Contents by Topic
The complete Contents by Topic, on the inside front cover,
groups the entries into categories and serves as a quick refer-
ence for finding all topics covered in the book. The Contents
by Topic allows a writer focusing on a specific task or problem
to locate helpful entries; it is also useful for instructors who
want to correlate the Handbook with standard textbooks or
their own course materials. The list of Commonly Misused
Words and Phrases extends this topical key by listing all the
usage entries in the book.
3.Checklistof the Writing Process
The Checklist helps readers to reference all writing-process-
related entries.
4.Comprehensive Index
The Index lists all the topics covered in the book, including
subtopics within the main entries in the alphabetical arrange-
ment.
5.Model Documents and Figures by Topic
The list of Model Documents and Figures by Topic, on the in-
side back cover, makes it easier to find the abundant “real-
world” examples and sample documents throughout the text
that provide models for effective technical communication.

=== Page 8 ===
HTW_fm01.qxp 8/22/08 8:52 AM Page ii

=== Page 9 ===
HTW_fm01.qxp 8/22/08 8:52 AM Page iv
Aboutthe Authors
Gerald J. Alred is Professor of English at the University of Wisconsin–
Milwaukee, where he teaches courses in the Graduate Professional
Writing Program. He is author of numerous scholarly articles and sev-
eral standard bibliographies on business and technical communication.
He is Associate Editor of the Journal of Business Communication and a
recipient of the prestigious Jay R. Gould Award for “profound schol-
arly and textbook contributions to the teaching of business and techni-
cal writing.”
Charles T. Brusaw was a faculty member at NCR Corporation’s Man-
agement College, where he developed and taught courses in profes-
sional writing, editing, and presentation skills for the corporation
worldwide. Previously, he worked in advertising, technical writing, and
public relations. He has been a communications consultant, an invited
speaker at academic conferences, and a teacher of business writing at
Sinclair Community College.
Walter E. Oliu served as Chief of the Publishing Services Branch at the
U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, where he managed the agency’s
printing, graphics, editing, and publishing programs. He also developed
the public-access standards for and managed daily operations of the
agency’s public Web site. He has taught at Miami University of Ohio,
Slippery Rock State University, and as an adjunct faculty member at
Montgomery College and George Mason University.

=== Page 10 ===
HTW_fm01.qxp 8/22/08 8:52 AM Page iii
Handbook of
Technical Writing

=== Page 11 ===
fm01.qxp 2/2/10 3:44 PM Page vi
FOR BEDFORD/ST. MARTIN’S
Developmental Editors:Amy Hurd Gershman, Rachel Goldberg
Editorial Assistant:Marisa Feinstein
Production Supervisor:Andrew Ensor
Senior Marketing Manager:Karita dos Santos
Project Management:Books By Design, Inc.
Text Design:Books By Design, Inc.
Cover Design:Billy Boardman
Cover Art:Technical Abstract© Stockbyte
Composition:Pine Tree Composition, Inc.
Printing and Binding:RR Donnelley & Sons Company
President:Joan E. Feinberg
Editorial Director:Denise B. Wydra
Editor in Chief:Karen S. Henry
Director of Marketing:Karen R. Soeltz
Director of Editing, Design, and Production:Marcia Cohen
Assistant Director of Editing, Design, and Production:Elise S. Kaiser
Manager, Publishing Services:Emily Berleth
Library of Congress Control Number: 2007943428
Copyright © 2009, 2006, 2003 by Bedford/St. Martin’s
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, except as may be
expressly permitted by the applicable copyright statutes or in writing by
the Publisher.
Manufactured in the United States of America.
3 2 1 0
f e d c
For information, write:Bedford/St. Martin’s, 75 Arlington Street,
Boston, MA 02116 (617-399-4000)
ISBN-10: 0-312-47707-4
ISBN-13: 978-0-312-47707-3
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Figure B–1. Corporate Blog. “GM FastLane Blog.” http://fastlane.gmblogs.com.
Gm.com. Reprinted with the permission of General Motors Corporation.
Figure D–3. Dictionary Entry for “regard.” From The American Heritage Dictionary
of the English Language, Fourth Edition. Copyright © 2006 by Houghton Mifflin
Company. Reprinted by permission. All rights reserved.
Acknowledgments and copyrights are continued at the back of the book on page 577,
which constitutes an extension of the copyright page.

=== Page 12 ===
HTW_fm01.qxp 8/22/08 8:52 AM Page v
Ninth Edition
Handbook of
Technical Writing
Gerald J. Alred
Charles T. Brusaw
Walter E. Oliu
Bedford/St.Martin’s Boston ◆ New York

=== Page 13 ===
HTW_fm01.qxp 8/22/08 8:52 AM Page ii

=== Page 14 ===
HTW_fm01.qxp 8/22/08 8:52 AM Page vii
Contents
Contents by Topic
inside front cover
Preface ix
Five Steps to Successful Writing xv
Checklist of the Writing Process xxiii
Handbook of Technical Writing:
Alphabetical Entries 1–576
Index 579
Commonly Misused Words and Phrases 627
Model Documents and
Figures by Topic
inside back cover
vii

=== Page 15 ===
This page intentionally left blank

=== Page 16 ===
HTW_fm01.qxp 8/22/08 8:52 AM Page ix
Preface
Like previous editions, the ninth edition of the Handbook of Technical
Writingis a comprehensive, easy-access guide to all aspects of technical
communication in the classroom and on the job. It places writing in a
real-world context with quick reference to hundreds of business writing
topics and scores of model documents and visuals. Meeting the needs
of today’s writers, the ninth edition includes expanded coverage of au-
dience and context and reflects the impact that e-mail and other tech-
nology have had on workplace communication. This comprehensive
reference tool is accompanied by a robust Web site that works together
with the text to offer expanded resources online.
Helpful Features
The ESL Tips boxes throughout the book offer special advice for multi-
lingual writers. In addition, the Contents by Topic on the inside front
cover includes a list of entries—ESL Trouble Spots—that may be of
particular interest to nonnative speakers of English.
Digital Tips and Web Links boxes direct readers to specific, related
resources on the companion Web site. The Digital Tips in the book sug-
gest ways to use technology to simplify complex writing tasks, such
as incorporating track changes and creating styles and templates. Ex-
panded Digital Tips on the Web site offer step-by-step instructions for
completing each task. Web Links in the book point students to related
resources on the companion site, such as model documents, tutorials,
and links to hundreds of useful, related Web sites.
Ethics Notes throughout the text highlight the ethical concerns of
today’s technical writers and offer advice for dealing with these con-
cerns. A thorough discussion of copyright and plagiarism clarifies what
plagiarism is in the digital age and highlights the ethical aspects of using
and documenting sources appropriately.
New to This Edition
As mentioned above, our focus in revising the Handbook for this edi-
tion has been to address the impact that technology has had on work-
place communication. We have updated our coverage of correspon-
dence and other entries throughout the book to show that there is often
more than one appropriate medium for a particular message. A report,
for example, can be sent as a hard copy, an e-mail attachment, or an
ix

=== Page 17 ===
HTW_fm01.qxp 8/22/08 8:52 AM Page x
x Preface
e-mail itself. To address this issue, we have expanded our rhetorical ad-
vice on analyzing context and audience and have added new informa-
tion on instant messaging, blogs, and other means by which today’s
writers communicate. We have also thoroughly updated coverage of
grammar, usage, and style, and have made the following additional im-
provements:
• Expanded coverage of the latest types of writing for the Web
discusses FAQs and blogs as forms of collaborative writing and
promotion. A new entry on content management suggests how
writers can use this technology to electronically access, share,
and revise a wide variety of digital forms.
• New information on environmental-impact statementsreflects
current environmental policy and ethics. Covering the scope,
language, and organization of these statements, the new entry
features a link to the Environmental Protection Agency Web site
and a full-length example.
• A new entry on repurposingexplains how writers can use content
for multiple purposes and audiences by adapting it for different
contexts and mediums.
• Detailed job-search entries discuss social-networking Web sites
such as MySpace and Facebook and their relationship to current
job-search issues.
• Updated coverage of research and documentation helps students
find, use, and integrate sources effectively in their writing. Real-
world documentation models and a visual guide to citing sources
make this challenging topic more accessible.
• Updated Digital Tipsthroughout the book focus on using technol-
ogy to assist with a variety of writing tasks, such as using wikis for
collaborative documents and conducting meetings from remote
locations.
• New and updated sample documents and visuals reflectthe promi-
nence of e-mail in the workplace. Other updated visuals include
charts, graphs, drawings, tables, internationally recognized sym-
bols, illustrated descriptions and instructions, brochure and
newsletter pages, presentation slides, and more.
• An updated companion Web site at bedfordstmartins.com/
alredtechhelps instructors take advantage of the Handbook’s
potential as a text for face-to-face, online, or hybrid classes by of-
fering lesson plans, handouts, teaching tips, and assignment ideas.
For students, the Web site includes additional sample documents,
useful tutorials, expanded Digital Tips, and links to hundreds of
useful Web sites keyed to the Handbook’s main entries.

=== Page 18 ===
10996_fm01.qxp 7/8/09 9:20 AM Page xi
Preface xi
How to Use This Book
The Handbook of Technical Writing is made up of alphabetically or-
ganized entries with color tabs. Within each entry, underlined cross-
references such as “formal reports” link readers to related entries that
contain further information. Many entries present advice and guidelines
in the form of convenient Writer’s Checklists.
The Handbook’s alphabetical organization enables readers to find
specific topics quickly and easily; however, readers with general ques-
tions will discover several alternate ways to find information in the book
and on its companion Web site at bedfordstmartins.com/alredtech.
• Contents by Topic.The complete Contents by Topic on the inside
front cover groups the alphabetical entries into topic categories.
This topical key can help a writer focusing on a specific task or
problem browse all related entries; it is also useful for instructors
who want to correlate the Handbookwith standard textbooks or
their own course materials.
• Commonly Misused Words and Phrases. The list of Commonly
Misused Words and Phrases on pages 627–28 extends the Con-
tents by Topic by listing all the usage entries, which appear in
italicsthroughout the book.
• Model Documents and Figures by Topic.The topically organized
list of model documents and figures on the inside back cover makes
it easier to browse the book’s most commonly referenced sample
documents and visuals to find specific examples of technical com-
munication genres.
• Checklist of the Writing Process.The checklist on pages xxiii–xxiv
helps readers reference key entries in a sequence useful for plan-
ning and carrying out a writing project.
• Comprehensive Index.The Index lists all the topics covered in the
book, including subtopics within the main entries in the alphabeti-
cal arrangement.
Acknowledgments
For their invaluable comments and suggestions for this edition of
Handbook of Technical Writing, we thank the following reviewers who
responded to our questionnaire: Dana Anderson, Indiana University,
Bloomington; Daniel Ding, Ferris State University; Daniel Fitzstephens,
University of Colorado; Karen Griggs, Indiana University–Purdue Uni-
versity, Fort Wayne; Lila M. Harper, Central Washington University;
Douglas Jerolimov, University of Virginia; John F. Lee, University of
Texas at San Antonio; Joseph P. McCallus, Columbus State University;
Barbara J. McCleary, University of Hartford; Laura Osborne, Stephen

=== Page 19 ===
10996_fm01.qxp 7/8/09 9:20 AM Page xii
xii Preface
F. Austin State University; Suzanne Kesler Rumsey, Indiana University–
Purdue University, Fort Wayne; Michael Stephans, Bloomsburg Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania; Babette Wald, California State University,
Dominguez Hills; Paul Walker, Northern Arizona University; and
Thomas L. Warren, Oklahoma State University.
For their helpful reviews of the model documents, we thank Patricia
C. Click, University of Virginia; Barbara D’Angelo, Arizona State Uni-
versity; Karen Gookin, Central Washington University; Dale Jacobson,
University of North Dakota; Nancy Nygaard, University of Wisconsin–
Milwaukee; and Linda Van Buskirk, Cornell University.
We owe special thanks to Michelle M. Schoenecker, University of
Wisconsin–Milwaukee, for her outstanding contribution to the ninth
edition, especially for her work on the entries “blogs,” “FAQs,” and
“repurposing.” Michelle’s workplace experience and her graduate stud-
ies in professional writing were invaluable—her keen analysis and
cheerful perspective brought fresh energy to the project.
We are indebted to Kenneth J. Cook, President, Ken Cook Co., for
his ongoing support of this and earlier editions. For this edition, we
thank especially Melissa Marney, Marketing Coordinator, and Wendy
Ballard, Technical Writer, both of Ken Cook Co.
We thank Dave Clark, University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee, and
Matthias Jonas, Manpower Inc., for developing the entry “content
management.” Thanks as well go to Stuart Selber, Pennsylvania State
University, for his review and advice for the entry “repurposing.” We
appreciate the help of Gail M. Boviall, Department of Mathematical
Sciences at the University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee, for her advice on
the entry “mathematical equations.”
We appreciate Rebekka Andersen and Richard Hay, University of
Wisconsin–Milwaukee, for their continuing work on “documenting
sources.” Thanks especially to Sara Eaton Gaunt for her excellent work
in updating this complicated section. Thanks also go to Erik Thelen,
Marquette University, and Mohan Limaye, Boise State University, for
their helpful advice and counsel. In addition, we are very much in-
debted to the many reviewers and contributors not named here who
helped us shape the first eight editions.
We wish to thank Bedford/St. Martin’s for supporting this book, es-
pecially Joan Feinberg, President, and Karen Henry, Editor in Chief. We
are grateful to Emily Berleth, Manager of Publishing Services at Bed-
ford/St. Martin’s, and Herb Nolan of Books By Design for their pa-
tience and expert guidance. Finally, we wish to thank Amy Hurd
Gershman and Rachel Goldberg, our developmental editors at Bed-
ford/St. Martin’s, whose professionalism and collegiality helped pro-
duce an outstanding edition.
We offer heartfelt thanks to Barbara Brusaw for her patience and
time spent preparing the manuscript for the first five editions. We also

=== Page 20 ===
10996_fm01.qxp 7/8/09 9:20 AM Page xiii
Preface xiii
gratefully acknowledge the ongoing contributions of many students and
instructors at the University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee. Finally, special
thanks go to Janice Alred for her many hours of substantive assistance
and for continuing to hold everything together.
G. J. A.
C. T. B.
W. E. O.

=== Page 21 ===
HTW_fm01.qxp 8/22/08 8:52 AM Page ii

=== Page 22 ===
HTW_fm01.qxp 8/22/08 8:52 AM Page xv
Five Steps to Successful Writing
Successful writing on the job is not the product of inspiration, nor is it
merely the spoken word converted to print; it is the result of knowing
how to structure information using both text and design to achieve an
intended purpose for a clearly defined audience. The best way to ensure
that your writing will succeed—whether it is in the form of a memo, a
résumé, a proposal, or a Web page—is to approach writing using the
following steps:
1. Preparation
2. Research
3. Organization
4. Writing
5. Revision
You will very likely need to follow those steps consciously—even self-
consciously—at first. The same is true the first time you use new soft-
ware, interview a candidate for a job, or chair a committee meeting.
With practice, the steps become nearly automatic. That is not to suggest
that writing becomes easy. It does not. However, the easiest and most
efficient way to write effectively is to do it systematically.
As you master the five steps, keep in mind that they are interrelated
and often overlap. For example, your readers’ needs and your purpose,
which you determine in step 1, will affect decisions you make in subse-
quent steps. You may also need to retrace steps. When you conduct re-
search, for example, you may realize that you need to revise your initial
understanding of the document’s purpose and audience. Similarly, when
you begin to organize, you may discover the need to return to the re-
search step to gather more information.
The time required for each step varies with different writing tasks.
When writing an informal memo, for example, you might follow the
first three steps (preparation, research, and organization) by simply list-
ing the points in the order you want to cover them. In such situations,
you gather and organize information in your mind as you consider your
purpose and audience. For a formal report, the first three steps require
well-organized research, careful note-taking, and detailed outlining. For
a routine e-mail message to a coworker, the first four steps merge as you
type the information onto the screen. In short, the five steps expand,
contract, and at times must be repeated to fit the complexity or context
of the writing task.
xv

=== Page 23 ===
HTW_fm01.qxp 8/22/08 8:52 AM Page xvi
xvi Five Steps to Successful Writing
Dividing the writing process into steps is especially useful for col-
laborative writing, in which you typically divide work among team
members, keep track of a project, and save time by not duplicating ef-
fort. For details on collaborating with others and using electronic tools
to help you manage the process, see collaborative writing.*
Preparation
Writing, like most professional tasks, requires solid preparation. In fact,
adequate preparation is as important as writing a draft. In preparation
for writing, your goal is to accomplish the following four major tasks:
• Establish your primary purpose.
• Assess your audience (or readers) and the context.
• Determine the scope of your coverage.
• Select the appropriate medium.
Establishing Your Purpose. To establish your primary purpose simply
ask yourself what you want your readers to know, to believe, or to be
able to do after they have finished reading what you have written. Be
precise. Often a writer states a purpose so broadly that it is almost use-
less. A purpose such as “to report on possible locations for a new re-
search facility” is too general. However, “to compare the relative
advantages of Paris, Singapore, and San Francisco as possible locations
for a new research facility so that top management can choose the best
location” is a purpose statement that can guide you throughout the
writing process. In addition to your primary purpose, consider possible
secondary purposes for your document. For example, a secondary pur-
pose of the research-facilities report might be to make corporate execu-
tive readers aware of the staffing needs of the new facility so that they
can ensure its smooth operation regardless of the location selected.
Assessing Your Audience and Context. The next task is to assess your
audience. Again, be precise and ask key questions. Who exactly is your
reader? Do you have multiple readers? Who needs to see or to use the
document? What are your readers’ needs in relation to your subject?
What are their attitudes about the subject? (Skeptical? Supportive?
Anxious? Bored?) What do your readers already know about the sub-
ject? Should you define basic terminology, or will such definitions
merely bore, or even impede, your readers? Are you communicating
with international readers and therefore dealing with issues inherent in
global communication?
*In this discussion, as elsewhere throughout this book, words and phrases underlined
and set in an alternate typeface refer to specific alphabetical entries.

=== Page 24 ===
HTW_fm01.qxp 8/22/08 8:52 AM Page xvii
Five Steps to Successful Writing xvii
For the research-facilities report, the readers are described as “top
management.” Who is included in that category? Will one of the people
evaluating the report be the Human Resources Manager? If so, that
person likely would be interested in the availability of qualified profes-
sionals as well as in the presence of training, housing, and perhaps even
recreational facilities available to potential employees in each city. The
Purchasing Manager would be concerned about available sources for
materials needed by the facility. The Marketing Manager would give
priority to the facility’s proximity to the primary markets for its prod-
ucts and services and the transportation options that are available. The
Chief Financial Officer would want to know about land and building
costs and about each country’s tax structure. The Chief Executive Offi-
cer would be interested in all this information and perhaps more. As
with this example, many workplace documents have audiences com-
posed of multiple readers. You can accommodate their needs through
one of a number of approaches described in the entry audience.
In addition to knowing the needs and interests of your readers,
learn as much as you can about the context. Simply put, context is the
environment or circumstances in which writers produce documents and
within which readers interpret their meanings. Everything is written in
a context, as illustrated in many entries and examples throughout this
book. To determine the effect of context on the research-facilities re-
port, you might ask both specific and general questions about the situa-
tion and about your readers’ backgrounds: Is this the company’s first
new facility, or has the company chosen locations for new facilities be-
fore? Have the readers visited all three cities? Have they already seen
other reports on the three cities? What is the corporate culture in which
your readers work, and what are its key values? What specific factors,
ESL TIPSfor Considering Audiences
In the United States, conciseness, coherence, and clarity characterize
good writing.Make sure readers can follow your writing,and say only
whatis necessary to communicate your message.Of course,no writing
style is inherently better than another,but to be a successful writer in
any language,you mustunderstand the cultural values thatunderlie the
language in which you are writing. See also awkwardness, copyright,
global communication,English as a second language,and plagiarism.
Throughoutthis book we have included ESL Tips boxes like this one
with information thatmay be particularly helpful to nonnative speak-
ers of English.See the Contents by Topic on the inside front cover for
listings of ESL Tips and ESL Trouble Spots,entries thatmay be of partic-
ular help to ESL writers.

=== Page 25 ===
HTW_fm01.qxp 8/22/08 8:52 AM Page xviii
xviii Five Steps to Successful Writing
such as competition, finance, and regulation, are recognized as impor-
tant within the organization?
Determining the Scope. Determining your purpose and assessing your
readers and context will help you decide what to include and what not
to include in your writing. Those decisions establish the scope of your
writing project. If you do not clearly define the scope, you will spend
needless hours on research because you will not be sure what kind of
information you need or even how much. Given the purpose and audi-
ence established for the report on facility locations, the scope would in-
clude such information as land and building costs, available labor force,
cultural issues, transportation options, and proximity to suppliers.
However, it probably would not include the early history of the cities
being considered or their climate and geological features, unless those
aspects were directly related to your particular business.
Selecting the Medium. Finally, you need to determine the most appro-
priate medium for communicating your message. Professionals on the
job face a wide array of options—from e-mail, fax, voice mail, video-
conferencing, and Web sites to more traditional means like letters,
memos, reports, telephone calls, and face-to-face meetings.
The most important considerations in selecting the appropriate
medium are the audience and the purpose of the communication. For
example, if you need to collaborate with someone to solve a problem or
if you need to establish rapport with someone, written exchanges could
be far less efficient than a phone call or a face-to-face meeting. How-
ever, if you need precise wording or you need to provide a record of a
complex message, communicate in writing. If you need to make in-
formation that is frequently revised accessible to employees at a large
company, the best choice might be to place the information on the com-
pany’s intranet site. If reviewers need to submit their written comments
about a proposal, you can either send them paper copies of the pro-
posal that can be faxed or scanned, or you can send them the word-
processing file to insert their comments electronically. The comparative
advantages and primary characteristics of the most typical means of
communication are discussed in selectingthe medium.
Research
The only way to be sure that you can write about a complex subject is
to thoroughly understand it. To do that, you must conduct adequate re-
search, whether that means conducting an extensive investigation for a
major proposal—through interviewing, library and Internet research,
and careful note-taking—or simply checking a company Web site and
jotting down points before you send an e-mail to a colleague.

=== Page 26 ===
HTW_fm01.qxp 8/22/08 8:52 AM Page xix
Five Steps to Successful Writing xix
Methods of Research. Researchers frequently distinguish between pri-
mary and secondary research, depending on the types of sources con-
sulted and the method of gathering information. Primary research
refers to the gathering of raw data compiled from interviews, direct ob-
servation, surveys, experiments, questionnaires, and audio and video
recordings, for example. In fact, direct observation and hands-on expe-
rience are the only ways to obtain certain kinds of information, such as
the behavior of people and animals, certain natural phenomena, me-
chanical processes, and the operation of systems and equipment. Sec-
ondary research refers to gathering information that has been analyzed,
assessed, evaluated, compiled, or otherwise organized into accessible
form. Such forms or sources include books, articles, reports, Web docu-
ments, e-mail discussions, and brochures. Use the methods most appro-
priate to your needs, recognizing that some projects will require several
types of research and that collaborative projects may require those re-
search tasks to be distributed among team members.
Sources of Information. As you conduct research, numerous sources
of information are available to you, including the following:
• Your own knowledge and that of your colleagues
• The knowledge of people outside your workplace, gathered
throughinterviewing for information
• Internet sources, including Web sites, directories, archives, and dis-
cussion groups
• Library resources, including databases and indexes of articles as
well as books and reference works
• Printed and electronic sources in the workplace, such as various
correspondence, reports, and Web intranet documents
Consider all sources of information when you begin your research and
use those that are appropriate and useful. The amount of research you
will need to do depends on the scope of your project. See also docu-
menting sources.
Organization
Without organization, the material gathered during your research will
be incoherent to your readers. To organize information effectively, you
need to determine the best way to structure your ideas; that is, you
must choose a primary method of development.
Methods of Development. An appropriate method of development is
the writer’s tool for keeping information under control and the readers’
means of following the writer’s presentation. As you analyze the

=== Page 27 ===
HTW_fm01.qxp 8/22/08 8:52 AM Page xx
xx Five Steps to Successful Writing
information you have gathered, choose the method that best suits your
subject, your readers’ needs, and your purpose. For example, if you were
writing instructions for assembling office equipment, you would natu-
rally present the steps of the process in the order readers should perform
them: the sequential method of development. If you were writing about
the history of an organization, your account would most naturally go
from the beginning to the present: the chronological method of develop-
ment. If your subject naturally lends itself to a certain method of devel-
opment, use it—do not attempt to impose another method on it.
Often you will need to combine methods of development. For
example, a persuasive brochure for a charitable organization might
combine a specific-to-general method of development with a cause-and-
effectmethod of development. That is, you could begin with persuasive
case histories of individual people in need and then move to general in-
formation about the positive effects of donations on recipients.
Outlining. Once you have chosen a method of development, you are
ready to prepare an outline. Outliningbreaks large or complex subjects
into manageable parts. It also enables you to emphasize key points by
placing them in the positions of greatest importance. By structuring
your thinking at an early stage, a well-developed outline ensures that
your document will be complete and logically organized, allowing you
to focus exclusively on writing when you begin the rough draft. An out-
line can be especially helpful for maintaining a collaborative-writing
team’s focus throughout a large project. However, even a short letter or
memo needs the logic and structure that an outline provides, whether
the outline exists in your mind or on-screen or on paper.
At this point, you must begin to consider layout and design ele-
ments that will be helpful to your readers and appropriate to your sub-
ject and purpose. For example, if visuals such as photographs or tables
will be useful, this is a good time to think about where they may be po-
sitioned to be most effective and if they need to be prepared by some-
one else while you are writing and revising the draft. The outline can
also suggest where headings, lists, andother special design features may
be useful.
Writing
When you have established your purpose, your readers’ needs, and your
scope and have completed your research and your outline, you will be
well prepared to write a first draft. Expand your outline into para-
graphs, without worrying about grammar, refinements of language
usage, or punctuation. Writing and revising are different activities; re-
finements come with revision.

=== Page 28 ===
HTW_fm01.qxp 8/22/08 8:52 AM Page xxi
Five Steps to Successful Writing xxi
Write the rough draft, concentrating entirely on converting your
outline into sentences and paragraphs. You might try writing as though
you were explaining your subject to a reader sitting across from you.
Do not worry about a good opening. Just start. Do not be concerned in
the rough draft about exact word choice unless it comes quickly and
easily—concentrate instead on ideas.
Even with good preparation, writing the draft remains a chore for
many writers. The most effective way to get started and keep going is to
use your outline as a map for your first draft. Do not wait for inspira-
tion—you need to treat writing a draft as you would any on-the-job
task. The entry writing a draft describes tactics used by experienced
writers—discover which ones are best suited to you and your task.
Consider writing an introduction last because then you will know
more precisely what is in the body of the draft. Your opening should
announce the subject and give readers essential background informa-
tion, such as the document’s primary purpose. For longer documents,
an introduction should serve as a frame into which readers can fit the
detailed information that follows.
Finally, you will need to write a conclusionthat ties the main ideas
together and emphatically makes a final significant point. The final
point may be to recommend a course of action, make a prediction or a
judgment, or merely summarize your main points—the way you con-
clude depends on the purpose of your writing and your readers’ needs.
Revision
The clearer finished writing seems to the reader, the more effort the
writer has likely put into its revision. If you have followed the steps of
the writing process to this point, you will have a rough draft that needs
to be revised. Revising, however, requires a different frame of mind
than does writing the draft. During revision, be eager to find and cor-
rect faults and be honest. Be hard on yourself for the benefit of your
readers. Read and evaluate the draft as if you were a reader seeing it for
the first time.
Check your draft for accuracy, completeness, and effectiveness in
achieving your purpose and meeting your readers’ needs and expecta-
tions. Trim extraneous information: Your writing should give readers
exactly what they need, but it should not burden them with unneces-
sary information or sidetrack them into loosely related subjects.
Do not try to revise for everything at once. Read your rough draft
several times, each time looking for and correcting a different set of
problems or errors. Concentrate first on larger issues, such as unityand
coherence; save mechanical corrections, like spelling and punctuation,
for later proofreading. See also ethics in writing.

=== Page 29 ===
HTW_fm01.qxp 8/22/08 8:52 AM Page xxii
xxii Five Steps to Successful Writing
Finally, for important documents, consider having others review
your writing and make suggestions for improvement. For collaborative
writing, of course, team members must review each other’s work on
segments of the document as well as the final master draft. Use the
Checklist of the Writing Process on pages xxiii–xxiv to guide you not
only as you revise but also throughout the writing process.
WEB LINK Style Guides and Standards
Organizations and professional associations often follow such guides
as The Chicago Manual of Style,MLA Style Manual and Guide to Scholarly
Publishing,andUnited States GovernmentPrinting Office Style Manual
to ensure consistency in their publications on issues of usage,format,
and documentation.Because advice in such guides often varies,some
organizations settheir own standards for documents.Where such stan-
dards or specific style guides are recommended or required by regula-
tions or policies,you should follow those style guidelines.For a selected
listof style guides and standards,see bcs.bedfordstmartins.com/
alredtechand selectLinks for Handbook Entries.

=== Page 30 ===
HTW_fm01.qxp 8/22/08 8:52 AM Page xxiii
Checklist of the Writing Process
ThischecklistarrangeskeyentriesoftheHandbookofTechnicalWriting
according to the sequence presented in Five Steps to Successful Writing,
which begins on page xv. This checklist is useful both for following the
steps and for diagnosing writing problems.
Preparation 389 Writing a Draft 569
(cid:2) (cid:2)
Establish your purpose 435 Select an appropriate pointof
(cid:2) Identify your audienceor view 385
(cid:2)
readers 42, 448 Adopt an appropriate styleand
(cid:2) Consider the context 98 tone 513, 532
(cid:2)
(cid:2) Determine your scopeof Use effective sentence
coverage 493 construction 498
(cid:2)
(cid:2) Construct effective
Selectthe medium 494
paragraphs 367
(cid:2)
Use quotationsand
Research 459
paraphrasing 445, 372
(cid:2)
Brainstormto determine what (cid:2)
Write an introduction 276
you already know 53
(cid:2)
Write a conclusion 93
(cid:2)
Conduct research 459
(cid:2)
Choose a title 529
(cid:2)
Take notes (note-taking) 347
(cid:2)
Interview for information 270 Revision 490
(cid:2)
Create and use
(cid:2)
Check for unityand
questionnaires 437
coherence 543, 71
(cid:2)
Avoid plagiarism 383
conciseness 90
(cid:2)
Documentsources 129
pace 367
transition 537
Organization 361
(cid:2)
Check for sentence variety 505
(cid:2)
Choose the best methods of
emphasis 167
development 329
(cid:2) parallel structure 370
Outlineyour notes and
ideas 362 subordination 516
(cid:2)
(cid:2) Develop and integrate Check for clarity 68
visuals 552 ambiguity 32
(cid:2)
Consider layoutand design 295 awkwardness 44
xxiii

=== Page 31 ===
HTW_fm01.qxp 8/22/08 8:52 AM Page xxiv
xxiv Checklistof the Writing Process
logic errors 312 agreement 23
positive writing 386 case 62
voice 557 modifiers 334
(cid:2)
Check for ethics in writing 177 pronoun reference 405
biased language 46 sentence faults 503
(cid:2)
copyright 101 Review mechanics and
plagiarism 383 punctuation 434
(cid:2) Check for appropriate word abbreviations 2
choice 568 capitalization 59
abstract/ concrete words 6 contractions 101
affectationand jargon 22, 285 dates 115
clichés 71 italics 283
connotation/ denotation 96 numbers 352
definingterms 116 proofreading 411
(cid:2)
Eliminate problems with spelling 512
grammar 234

=== Page 32 ===
HTW_fm01.qxp 8/22/08 8:52 AM Page xxv
Handbook of
Technical Writing

=== Page 33 ===
HTW_fm01.qxp 8/22/08 8:52 AM Page ii

=== Page 34 ===
HTW_ch0A.qxp 8/25/08 8:40 AM Page 1
A
A
a / an
A and an are indefinite articles because the noun designated by the ar-
ticle is not a specific person, place, or thing but is one of a group.
(cid:2) She installed aprogram.
[not a specific program but an unnamed program]
Use a before words or abbreviations beginning with a consonant or
consonant sound, including yor w.
(cid:2) Amanual is available online.
(cid:2) It was ahistoric event for the Institute.
[Historicbegins with the consonant h.]
(cid:2) We received aDNA sample.
(cid:2) The year’s activities are summarized in aone-page report.
[Onebegins with the consonant sound “wuh.”]
Use anbefore words or abbreviations beginning with a vowel or a con-
sonant with a vowel sound.
(cid:2) The report is anoverview of the year’s activities.
(cid:2) The applicant arrived anhour early.
[Hourbegins with a silent h.]
(cid:2) She bought anSLR digital camera.
[SLRbegins with a vowel sound “ess.”]
Do not use unnecessary indefinite articles in a sentence.
(cid:2) Fill with ahalf apint of fluid.
[Choose one article and eliminate the other.]
See also adjectives.
1

=== Page 35 ===
HTW_ch0A.qxp 8/25/08 8:40 AM Page 2
2 a lot
A
a lot
A lotis often incorrectly written as one word (alot). The phrase a lotis
informal and normally should not be used in technical writing. Use
manyor numerousfor estimates or give a specific number or amount.
many
(cid:2) We received a lot ofe-mails supporting the new policy.
^
abbreviations
DIRECTORY
Using Abbreviations 2
Writer’s Checklist:Using Abbreviations 3
Forming Abbreviations 3
Names of Organizations 3
Measurements 4
Personal Names and Titles 4
Common Scholarly Abbreviations 4
Abbreviations are shortened versions of words or combinations of the
first letters of words (Corp./Corporation, URL/Uniform Resource Lo-
cator). Abbreviations, if used appropriately, can be convenient for both
the reader and the writer. Like symbols, they can be important space
savers in technical writing.
Abbreviations that are formed by combining the initial letter of
each word in a multiword term are called initialisms. Initialisms are
pronounced as separate letters (AC or ac/alternating current). Abbrevia-
tions that combine the first letter or letters of several words—and can
be pronounced—are called acronyms(PIN/personal identification num-
ber, laser/light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation).
Using Abbreviations
In business, industry, and government, specialists and those working to-
gether on particular projects often use abbreviations. The most impor-
tant consideration in the use of abbreviations is whether they will be
understood by your audience. The same abbreviation, for example, can
have two different meanings (NEA stands for both the National Edu-
cation Association and the National Endowment for the Arts). Like
jargon, shortened forms are easily understood within a group of spe-
cialists; outside the group, however, shortened forms might be incom-
prehensible. In fact, abbreviations can be easily overused, either as an
affectation or in a misguided attempt to make writing concise, even

=== Page 36 ===
HTW_ch0A.qxp 8/25/08 8:40 AM Page 3
abbreviations 3
A
with instantmessaging where abbreviations are often used. Remember
that memos, e-mail, or reportsaddressed to specific people may be read
by other people—you must consider those secondary audiences as well.
A good rule to follow is “when in doubt, spell it out.”
WRITER’S CHECKLIST Using Abbreviations
(cid:3)
Exceptfor commonly used abbreviations (U.S.,a.m.),spell outa term
to be abbreviated the firsttime itis used,followed by the abbrevia-
tion in parentheses.Thereafter,the abbreviation may be used alone.
(cid:3)
In long documents,repeatthe full term in parentheses after the ab-
breviation atregular intervals to remind readers of the abbreviation’s
meaning,as in “Remember to submitthe CAR (Capital Appropriations
Request) by....”
(cid:3)
Do notadd an additional period atthe end of a sentence thatends
with an abbreviation.(The official name of the company is DataBase,
Inc.)
(cid:3)
For abbreviations specific to your profession or discipline,use a style
guide recommended by your professional organization or company.
(A listof style guides appears atthe end of documenting sources.)
(cid:3)
Write acronyms in capital letters withoutperiods.The only exceptions
are acronyms thathave become accepted as common nouns,which
are written in lowercase letters,such as scuba(self-contained under-
water breathing apparatus).
(cid:3)
Generally,use periods for lowercase initialisms (a.k.a.,e.d.p.,p.m.) but
notfor uppercase ones (GDP,IRA,UFO).Exceptions include geographic
names (U.S.,U.K.,E.U.) and the traditional expression of academic de-
grees (B.A.,M.B.A.,Ph.D.).
(cid:3)
Form the plural of an acronym or initialism by adding a lowercase s.
Do notuse an apostrophe(CARs,DVDs).
(cid:3)
Do notfollow an abbreviation with a word thatrepeats the final term
in the abbreviation (HIV transmission notHIV virus transmission).
(cid:3)
Do notmake up your own abbreviations;they will confuse readers.
Forming Abbreviations
Names of Organizations. A company may include in its name a term
such as Brothers, Incorporated, Corporation, Company,orLimited Li-
ability Company. If the term is abbreviated in the official company
name that appears on letterhead stationery or on its Web site, use the
abbreviated form: Bros., Inc., Corp., Co., or LLC. If the term is not
abbreviated in the official name, spell it out in writing, except with
addresses, footnotes, bibliographies, and lists where abbreviations may

=== Page 37 ===
HTW_ch0A.qxp 8/25/08 8:40 AM Page 4
4 abbreviations
A
be used. Likewise, use an ampersand (&) only if it appears in the offi-
cial company name. For names of divisions within organizations, terms
such as Department and Division should be abbreviated only when
space is limited (Dept. and Div.).
Measurements. Except for abbreviations that may be confused with
words (in. for inch and gal. for gallon), abbreviations of measurement
do not require periods (yd for yard and qt for quart). Abbreviations
of units of measure are identical in the singular and plural: 1 cm and
15 cm (not 15 cms). Some abbreviations can be used in combination
with other symbols (°Ffor degrees Fahrenheitand ft2for square feet).
The following list includes abbreviations for the basic units of the In-
ternational System of Units (SI), the metric system. This system not only
is used in science but also is used in international commerce and trade.
MEASUREMENT UNIT ABBREVIATION
length meter m
mass kilogram kg
time second s
electric current ampere A
thermodynamic temperature kelvin K
amountof substance mole mol
luminous intensity candela cd
For additional definitions and background, see the National Institute
of Standards and Technology Web site at http://physics.nist.gov/cuu/
Units/units.html. For information on abbreviating dates and time, see
numbers.
Personal Names and Titles. Personal names generally should not be
abbreviated: Thomas (notThos.) and William (notWm.). An academic,
civil, religious, or military title should be spelled out and in lowercase
when it does not precede a name. (“The captainwanted to check the or-
ders.”) When they precede names, some titles are customarily abbrevi-
ated (Dr. Smith, Mr. Mills, Ms. Katz). See also Ms./Miss/Mrs.
An abbreviation of a title may follow the name; however, be certain
that it does not duplicate a title before the name (Angeline Martinez,
Ph.D. orDr. Angeline Martinez). When addressing correspondenceand
including names in other documents, you normally should spell out
titles (The Honorable Mary J. Holt; Professor Charles Matlin). Tradi-
tionally, periods are used with academic degrees, although they are
sometimes omitted (M.A./MA, M.B.A./MBA, Ph.D./PhD).
Common Scholarly Abbreviations. The following is a partial list of ab-
breviations commonly used in reference books and for documenting

=== Page 38 ===
HTW_ch0A.qxp 8/25/08 8:40 AM Page 5
abbreviations 5
A
sources in research papers and reports. Other than in formal scholarly
work, generally avoid such abbreviations.
anon. anonymous
bibliog. bibliography,bibliographer,bibliographic
ca.,c. circa,“about”(used with approximate dates:ca.1756)
cf. confer,“compare”
chap. chapter
diss. dissertation
ed.,eds. edited by,editor(s),edition(s)
e.g. exempli gratia,“for example”(see e.g./i.e.)
esp. especially
etal. etalii,“and others”
etc. etcetera,“and so forth”(see etc.)
ff. and the following page(s) or line(s)
GPO GovernmentPrinting Office,Washington,D.C.
i.e. id est,“thatis”
MS,MSS manuscript,manuscripts
n.,nn. note,notes (used immediately after page number:
56n.,56n.3,56nn.3–5)
N.B.,n.b. nota bene,“take notice,mark well”
n.d. no date (of publication)
n.p. no place (of publication);no publisher;no page
p.,pp. page,pages
proc. proceedings
pub. published by,publisher,publication
rev. revised by,revised,revision;review,reviewed by (Spell
out“review”where “rev.”mightbe ambiguous.)
rpt. reprinted by,reprint
sec.,secs. section,sections
sic so,thus;inserted in brackets([sic]) after a misspelled
or wrongly used word in quotations
supp.,suppl. supplement
trans. translated by,translator,translation
UP University Press (used in MLA style,as in “Oxford UP”)
viz. videlicet,“namely”
vol.,vols. volume,volumes
vs.,v. versus,“against”(v.preferred in titles of legal cases)
WEB LINK Using Abbreviations
For links to Web sites specifying standard abbreviations and acronyms,
including U.S.Postal Service abbreviations,see bedfordstmartins.com/
alredtechand selectLinks for Handbook Entries.

=== Page 39 ===
HTW_ch0A.qxp 8/25/08 8:40 AM Page 6
6 above
A
above
Avoid using above to refer to a preceding passage or visual because its
reference is vague and often an affectation. The same is true of afore-
said and aforementioned. (See also former/latter.) To refer to some-
thing previously mentioned, repeat the noun or pronoun, or construct
your paragraphso that your reference is obvious.
your travel voucher
(cid:2) Please complete and submit the aboveby March 1.
^
absolutely
Absolutelymeans “definitely,” “entirely,” “completely,” or “unquestion-
ably.” Avoid it as a redundant intensifierto mean “very” or “much.”
(cid:2) We are absolutelycertain we can meet the deadline.
abstract / concrete words
Abstractwords refer to general ideas, qualities, conditions, acts, or rela-
tionships—intangible things that cannot be detected by the five senses
(sight, hearing, touch, taste, and smell), such as learning, leadership,
and technology. Concrete words identify things that can be perceived
by the five senses, such as diploma, manager, and keyboard.
Abstract words must frequently be further defined or described.
to interview the maintenance technicians
(cid:2) The accident investigation team needs freedom.
^
Abstract words are best used with concrete words to help make intan-
gible concepts specific and vivid.
(cid:2) Transportation[abstract] was limited to buses[concrete] and
commuter trains[concrete].
The example in Figure A–1 represents seven levels of abstraction from
most abstract to most concrete; the appropriate level depends on your
purposein writing and on the contextin which you are using the word.
See also word choice.

=== Page 40 ===
HTW_ch0A.qxp 8/25/08 8:40 AM Page 7
abstracts 7
A
Real Office Copiers Ser. No. 93512764
estate furniture Hewlett Packard Ser. No. 46721539
Assets Equipment O m f a fi c c h e ines Printers Dell Ser. No. 21539467
Inventory Parts Factory Fax Xerox
in stock equipment machines
FIGUREA–1. Abstract-to-Concrete Words
abstracts
An abstract summarizes and highlights the major points of a formal re-
port, trade journal article, dissertation, or other long work. Its primary
purpose is to enable readers to decide whether to read the work in full.
For a discussion of how summaries differ from abstracts, see executive
summaries.
Although abstracts, typically 200 to 250 words long, are published
with the longer works they condense, they can also be published sepa-
rately in periodical indexes and by abstracting services (see research).
For this reason, an abstract must be readable apart from the original
document.
Types of Abstracts
Depending on the kind of information they contain, abstracts are often
classified as descriptive or informative. A descriptive abstract summa-
rizes the purpose, scope, and methods used to arrive at the reported
findings. It is a slightly expanded table of contentsin sentence and para-
graph form. A descriptive abstract need not be longer than several sen-
tences. An informative abstract is an expanded version of the descrip-
tive abstract. In addition to information about the purpose, scope, and
research methods used, the informative abstract summarizes any re-
sults, conclusions, and recommendations. The informative abstract re-
tains the tone and essential scope of the original work, omitting its
details. The first four sentences of the abstract shown in Figure A–2
alone would be descriptive; with the addition of the sentences that de-
tail the conclusions of the report, the abstract becomes informative.
The type of abstract you should write depends on your audience
and the organization or publication for which you are writing. Informa-
tive abstracts work best for wide audiences that need to know conclu-
sions and recommendations; descriptive abstracts work best for compi-
lations, such as proceedings and progress reports, that do not contain
conclusions or recommendations.

=== Page 41 ===
HTW_ch0A.qxp 8/25/08 8:40 AM Page 8
8 abstracts
A
ABSTRACT
The Effects of Long-Distance Running on Male
and Female Runners Aged 50 to 72 Years
by Sandra Young
The long-term effects of long-distance running on the bones,
Purpose joints, and general health of runners aged 50 to 72 can help de-
termine whether physicians should recommend long-distance
running for their older patients. Recent studies conducted at
Stanford University and the University of Florida tested and
compared male and female long-distance runners aged 50 to Descriptive
section
Methods 72 with a control group of runners and nonrunners. The groups
and scope were matched by sex, race, education, and occupation. The
Florida study used only male runners who had run at least
20 miles a week for five years and compared them with a
group of runners and nonrunners. Both studies based findings
on medical histories and on physical and X-ray examinations.
Findings Both studies conclude that long-distance running is not associ-
ated with increased degenerative joint disease. Control groups
were more prone to spur formation, sclerosis, and joint-space
narrowing and showed more joint degeneration than runners.
Female long-distance runners exhibited somewhat more sclero-
sis in knee joints and the lumbar spine area than matched
control subjects. Both studies support the role of exercise in
retarding bone loss with aging. The investigation concludes Conclusions
that the health risk factors are fewer for long-distance runners
than for those less active aged 50 to 72. The investigation rec-
Recommen-
ommends that physicians recognize that an exercise program
dations
that includes long-distance running can be beneficial to their
aging patients’health.
Keywords: bone loss, exercise programs, geriatric patients,
health risk, joint and lumbar degeneration, long-distance run-
ning, runners, sclerosis.
FIGUREA–2. Informative Abstract(for an Article)
Writing Strategies
Write the abstract afterfinishing the report or document. Otherwise, the
abstract may not accurately reflect the longer work. Begin with a topic
sentence that announces the subject and scope of your original docu-
ment. Then, using the major and minor headings of your outline or table

=== Page 42 ===
HTW_ch0A.qxp 8/25/08 8:40 AM Page 9
acceptance / refusal letters 9
A
of contents to distinguish primary ideas from secondary ones, decide
what material is relevant to your abstract. (See outlining.) Write with
clarity and conciseness, eliminating unnecessary words and ideas. Do
not, however, become so terse that you omit articles (a, an, the) and im-
portant transitional words and phrases (however, therefore, but, next).
Write complete sentences, but avoid stringing together a group of short
sentences end to end; instead, combine ideas by using subordinationand
parallel structure. Spell out all but the most common abbreviations. In a
report, an abstract follows the title page and is numbered page iii.
accept / except
Acceptis a verbmeaning “consent to,” “agree to take,” or “admit will-
ingly.” (“I acceptthe responsibility.”) Exceptis normally used as a prepo-
sition meaning “other than” or “excluding.” (“We agreed on everything
exceptthe schedule.”)
acceptance / refusal letters (for employment)
When you decide to accept a job offer, you can notify your new em-
ployer by telephone or in a meeting—but to make your decision offi-
cial, you need to send an acceptance in writing. What you include in
your message and whether you send a letter or an e-mail depends on
your previous conversations with your new employer. See also corre-
spondence. Figure A–3 shows an example of a job acceptance letter
written by a graduating student with substantial experience (see his ré-
suméin Figure R–7 on page 475).
Note that in the first paragraph of Figure A–3, the writer identifies
the job he is accepting and the salary he has been offered—doing so
can avoid any misunderstandings about the job or the salary. In the sec-
ond paragraph, the writer details his plans for relocating and reporting
for work. Even if the writer discussed these arrangements during earlier
conversations, he needs to confirm them, officially, in this written mes-
sage. The writer concludes with a brief but enthusiastic statement that
he looks forward to working for the new employer.
When you decide to reject a job offer, send a written job refusal to
make that decision official, even if you have already notified the em-
ployer during a meeting or on the phone. Writing to an employer is an
important goodwill gesture. Be especially tactful and courteous—the
employer you are refusing has spent time and effort interviewing you
and may have counted on your accepting the job. Remember, you may

=== Page 43 ===
HTW_ch0A.qxp 8/25/08 8:40 AM Page 10
10 acceptance / refusal letters
A
Dear Ms. Castro:
I am pleased to accept your offer of $44,500 per year as a Graphic
Designer with the Natural History Museum.
After graduation, I plan to leave Pittsburgh on Tuesday, June 2. I
should be able to find living accommodations and be ready to report
for work on Monday, June 15. If you need to reach me prior to this
date, please call me at 412-555-1212 (cell) or contact me by e-mail
at jgoodman@aol.com.
I look forward to joining the marketing team and working with the
excellent support staff I met during the interview.
Sincerely,
Joshua Goodman
Joshua Goodman
FIGURE A–3. Acceptance Letter (for Employment)
apply for another job at that company in the future. In Figure A–4, an
example of a job refusal, the applicant mentions something positive
about his contact with the employer and refers to the specific job of-
fered. He indicates his serious consideration of the offer, provides a log-
Dear Mr. Vallone:
I enjoyed talking with you about your opening for a manager of
aerospace production at your Rockford facility, and I seriously
considered your generous offer.
After giving the offer careful thought, however, I have decided to
accept a management position with a research-and-development
firm. I feel that the job I have chosen is better suited to my long-
term goals.
I appreciate your consideration and the time you spent with me.
I wish you success in filling the position.
Sincerely,
Robert Mandillo
Robert Mandillo
FIGURE A–4. Refusal Letter (for Employment)

=== Page 44 ===
HTW_ch0A.qxp 8/25/08 8:40 AM Page 11
acronyms and initialisms 11
A
ical reason for the refusal, and concludes on a pleasant note. (See his ré-
sumé in Figure R–8 on page 476) For further advice on handling re-
fusals and negative messages generally, see refusal letters.
accuracy / precision
Accuracymeans error-free and correct. Precision, mathematically, refers
to the “degree of refinement with which a measurement is made.”
Thus, a measurement carried to five decimal places (5.28371) is more
precise than one carried to two decimal places (5.28), but it is not nec-
essarily more accurate.
acknowledgment letters
One way to build goodwill with colleagues and clients is to send an
acknowledgment, letting them know that something they sent arrived
and expressing thanks. It is usually a short, polite note. The example
shown in Figure A–5 could be sent as a letteror an e-mail. See also cor-
respondence.
Dear Mr. Evans:
I received your comprehensive report today. When I finish studying
it in detail, I’ll send you our cost estimate for the installation of the
ECAT 1240 Pet Scanner.
Thank you for preparing such a thorough analysis.
Regards,
Roger Vonblatz
FIGUREA–5. Acknowledgment
acronyms and initialisms
Acronyms are formed by combining the first letter or letters of several
words; they are pronounced as words and written without periods
(ANSI/American National Standards Institute). Initialisms are formed

=== Page 45 ===
HTW_ch0A.qxp 8/25/08 8:40 AM Page 12
12 activate / actuate
A
by combining the initial letter of each word in a multiword term; they
are pronounced as separate letters (STC/Society for Technical Commu-
nication). See abbreviationsfor the use of acronyms and initialisms.
activate / actuate
Both activateand actuatemean “make active,” although actuateis usu-
ally applied only to mechanical processes.
(cid:2) The relay actuatesthe trip hammer. [mechanical process]
(cid:2) The electrolyte activates the battery. [chemical process]
(cid:2) The governor activated the National Guard. [legal process]
active voice (see voice)
ad hoc
Ad hoc is Latin for “for this” or “for this particular occasion.” An ad
hoc committee is one set up temporarily to consider a particular issue.
The term has been fully assimilated into English and thus does not have
to be italicized. See also foreign words in English.
adapt / adept / adopt
Adaptis a verb meaning “adjust to a new situation.” Adeptis an adjec-
tive meaning “highly skilled.” Adopt is a verb meaning “take or use as
one’s own.”
(cid:2) The company will adopta policy of finding engineers who are
adeptmanagers and who can adaptto new situations.
adjectives
DIRECTORY
Limiting Adjectives 13 Placementof Adjectives 15
Comparison of Adjectives 14 Use of Adjectives 16

=== Page 46 ===
HTW_ch0A.qxp 8/25/08 8:40 AM Page 13
adjectives 13
A
An adjective is any word that modifies a noun or pronoun. Descriptive
adjectives identify a quality of a noun or pronoun. Limiting adjectives
impose boundaries on the noun or pronoun.
(cid:2) hotsurface [descriptive]
(cid:2) threephone lines [limiting]
Limiting Adjectives
Limiting adjectives include the following categories:
• Articles (a, an, the)
• Demonstrative adjectives (this, that, these, those)
• Possessive adjectives (my, your, his, her, its, our, their)
• Numeral adjectives (two, first)
• Indefinite adjectives (all, none, some, any)
Articles. Articles (a, an, the) are traditionally classified as adjectives
because they modify nouns by either limiting them or making them
more specific. See also articlesand English as a second language.
Demonstrative Adjectives. A demonstrative adjective points to the
thing it modifies, specifying the object’s position in space or time. This
and thesespecify a closer position; thatand thosespecify a more remote
position.
(cid:2) Thisreport is more current than thatreport, which Human
Resources distributed last month.
(cid:2) Thesesales figures are more recent than thosereported last week.
Demonstrative adjectives often cause problems when they modify the
nouns kind, type, and sort. Demonstrative adjectives used with those
nouns should agree with them in number.
(cid:2) thiskind, thesekinds; thattype, thosetypes
Confusion often develops when the preposition of is added (this kind
of, these kinds of) and the object of the preposition does not conform
in number to the demonstrative adjective and its noun. See also agree-
mentand prepositions.
policy is
(cid:2) This kind ofhuman resources policies arestandard.
^
policies are
(cid:2) These kinds ofhuman resources policy isstandard.
^

=== Page 47 ===
HTW_ch0A.qxp 8/25/08 8:40 AM Page 14
14 adjectives
A
Avoid using demonstrative adjectives with words like kind, type, and
sort because doing so can easily lead to vagueness. Instead, be more
specific. See also kind of / sortof.
Possessive Adjectives. Because possessive adjectives (my, your, his, her,
its, our, their) directly modify nouns, they function as adjectives, even
though they are pronoun forms (myidea, herplans, theirprojects). See
also functional shift.
Numeral Adjectives. Numeral adjectives identify quantity, degree, or
place in a sequence. They always modify count nouns. Numeral adjec-
tives are divided into two subclasses: cardinal and ordinal. A cardinal
adjective expresses an exact quantity (one pencil, two computers); an
ordinal adjectiveexpresses degree or sequence (firstquarter, secondedi-
tion).
In most writing, an ordinal adjective should be spelled out if it is a
single word (tenth) and written in figures if it is more than one word
(312th). Ordinal numbers can also function as adverbs. (John arrived
first.) See also first/ firstlyand numbers.
Indefinite Adjectives. Indefinite adjectives do not designate anything
specific about the nouns they modify (some CD-ROMs, all designers).
The articles a and an are included among the indefinite adjectives (a
chair, anapplication).
Comparison of Adjectives
Most adjectives in the positive form show the comparative form with
the suffix -erfor two items and the superlative form with the suffix -est
for three or more items.
(cid:2) The first report is long. [positive form]
(cid:2) The second report is longer. [comparative form]
(cid:2) The third report is longest. [superlative form]
Many two-syllable adjectives and most three-syllable adjectives are pre-
ceded by the word more or most to form the comparative or the su-
perlative.
(cid:2) The new media center is moreimpressive than the old one. It is the
mostimpressive in the county.
A few adjectives have irregular forms of comparison (much, more,
most; little, less, least).
Some adjectives (round, unique, exact, accurate), often called abso-
lute words, are not logically subject to comparison.

=== Page 48 ===
HTW_ch0A.qxp 8/25/08 8:40 AM Page 15
adjectives 15
A
ESL TIPSfor Using Adjectives
Do notadd -sor -esto an adjective to make itplural.
(cid:2) the longtrip
(cid:2) the longtrips
Capitalize adjectives of origin (city,state,nation,continent).
(cid:2) the Venetiancanals
(cid:2) the Texaslonghorn steer
(cid:2) the Frenchgovernment
(cid:2) the Africandeserts
In English,verbs of feeling (for example,bore,interest, surprise) have
two adjectival forms:the present participle (-ing) and the past parti-
ciple (-ed). Use the present participle to describe what causes the
feeling.Use the pastparticiple to describe the person who experiences
the feeling.
(cid:2) We heard the surprisingelection results.
[The election resultscause the feeling.]
(cid:2) Only the losing candidate was surprisedby the election results.
[The candidateexperienced the feeling of surprise.]
Adjectives follow nouns in English in only two cases:when the ad-
jective functions as a subjective complement
(cid:2) That project is not finished.
and when an adjective phrase or clause modifies the noun.
(cid:2) The project that was suspended temporarily...
In all other cases,adjectives are placed before the noun.
When there are multiple adjectives,itis often difficultto know the
rightorder.The guidelines illustrated in the following example would
apply in most circumstances, but there are exceptions. (Normally do
notuse a phrase with so many stacked modifiers.) See also articles.
(cid:2) The six extra-large rectangular brown cardboard take-out containers
number size color qualifier
determiner comment shape material noun
Placementof Adjectives
When limiting and descriptive adjectives appear together, the limiting
adjectives precede the descriptive adjectives, with the articles usually in
the first position.

=== Page 49 ===
HTW_ch0A.qxp 8/25/08 8:40 AM Page 16
16 adjustmentletters
A
(cid:2) Theten yellowtaxis were sold at auction.
[article (The), limiting adjective (ten), descriptive adjective (yellow)]
Within a sentence, adjectives may appear before the nouns they modify
(the attributive position) or after the nouns they modify (the predicative
position).
(cid:2) The smalljobs are given priority. [attributive position]
(cid:2) The exposure is brief. [predicative position]
Use of Adjectives
Nouns often function as adjectives to clarify the meaning of other
nouns.
(cid:2) The accidentreport prompted a productredesign.
When adjectives modifying the same noun can be reversed and still
make sense or when they can be separated by andor or, they should be
separated by commas.
(cid:2) The division seeks bright, energetic, creativedesigners.
Notice that there is no comma after creative. Never use a comma be-
tween a final adjective and the noun it modifies. When an adjective
modifies a phrase, no comma is required.
(cid:2) We need an updated Web page design.
[Updatedmodifies the phrase Web page design.]
Writers sometimes string together a series of nouns used as adjectives to
form a unit modifier, thereby creating stacked (jammed) modifiers,
which can confuse readers. See also word choice.
adjustment letters
An adjustment letteror e-mailis written in response to a complaintand
tells a customer or client what your organization intends to do about
the complaint. Although sent in response to a problem, an adjustment
letter actually provides an excellent opportunity to build goodwill for
your organization. An effective adjustment letter, such as the examples
shown in Figures A–6 and A–7, can not only repair any damage done
but also restore the customer’s confidence in your company.
No matter how unreasonable the complaint, the tone of your re-
sponse should be positive and respectful. Avoid emphasizing the prob-
lem, but do take responsibility for it when appropriate. Focus your

=== Page 50 ===
HTW_ch0A.qxp 8/25/08 8:40 AM Page 17
adjustmentletters 17
A
I S C
NTERNET ERVICES ORPORATION
10876 Crispen Way
Chicago, Illinois 60601
May 11, 2009
Mr. Jason Brandon
4319 Anglewood Street
Tacoma, WA 98402
Dear Mr. Brandon:
We are sorry that your experience with our customer support help
line did not go smoothly. We are eager to restore your confidence in
our ability to provide dependable, high-quality service. Your next
three months of Internet access will be complimentary as our sin-
cere apology for your unpleasant experience.
Providing dependable service is what is expected of us, and when
our staff doesn’t provide quality service, it is easy to understand our
customers’disappointment. I truly wish we had performed better
in our guidance for setup and log-on procedures and that your
experience had been a positive one. To prevent similar problems
in the future, we plan to use your letter in training sessions with
customer support personnel.
We appreciate your taking the time to write us. It helps to receive
comments such as yours, and we conscientiously follow through
to be sure that proper procedures are being met.
Yours truly,
Inez Carlson
Inez Carlson, Vice President
Customer Support Services
www.isc.com
FIGUREA–6. AdjustmentLetter (When Company Is atFault)

=== Page 51 ===
HTW_ch0A.qxp 8/25/08 8:40 AM Page 18
18 adjustmentletters
A
Dear Mr. Sanchez:
Enclosed is your Addison Laptop Computer, which you shipped to
us on August 31.
Our technical staff reports that the laptop was damaged by exposure
to high levels of humidity. You stated in your letter that you often
use your laptop on a covered patio. Doing so in a high-humidity
environment, as is typical in Louisiana, can result in damage to the
internal circuitry of your computer—as described on page 32 of
your Addison Owner’s Manual.
We have replaced the damaged circuitry and thoroughly tested your
laptop. To ensure that a repetition of your recent experience does
not occur, we recommend you avoid leaving your laptop exposed
to high humidity for extended periods.
If you should find that the problem recurs, please call us at
800-555-0990. We will be glad to work with you to find a solution.
Sincerely,
Customer Service Department
FIGUREA–7. Partial Adjustment(Accompanying a Product)
response on what you are doing to correct the problem. Settle such mat-
ters quickly and courteously, and lean toward giving the customer or
client the benefit of the doubt at a reasonable cost to your organization.
See also refusal letters.
Full Adjustments
Before granting an adjustment to a claim for which your company is at
fault, first determine what happened and what you can do to satisfy the
customer. Be certain that you are familiar with your company’s adjust-
ment policy—and be careful with word choice:
(cid:2) We have just received your letter of May 7 about our defectivegas
grill.
Saying something is “defective” could be ruled in a court of law as an
admission that the product is in fact defective. When you are in doubt,
seek legal advice.
Grant adjustments graciously: A settlement made grudgingly will
do more harm than good. Not only must you be gracious, but you must
also acknowledge the error in such a way that the customer will not

=== Page 52 ===
HTW_ch0A.qxp 8/25/08 8:40 AM Page 19
adverbs 19
A
lose confidence in your company. Emphasize early what the reader will
consider good news.
(cid:2) Enclosed is a replacement for the damaged part.
(cid:2) Yes, you were incorrectly billed for the delivery.
(cid:2) Please accept our apologies for the error in your account.
If an explanation will help restore your reader’s confidence, explain
what caused the problem. You might point out any steps you may be
taking to prevent a recurrence of the problem. Explain that customer
feedback helps your firm keep the quality of its product or service high.
Close pleasantly, looking forward, not back. Avoid recalling the prob-
lem in your closing (do not write, “Again, we apologize...”).
The adjustment letter in Figure A–6, for example, begins by accept-
ing responsibility and offers an apology for the customer’s inconve-
nience (note the use of the pronouns weand our). The second paragraph
expresses a desire to restore goodwill and describes specifically how the
writer intends to make the adjustment. The third paragraph expresses
appreciation to the customer for calling attention to the problem and
assures him that his complaint has been taken seriously.
Partial Adjustments
You may sometimes need to grant a partial adjustment—even if a claim
is not really justified—to regain the lost goodwill of a customer or
client. If, for example, a customer incorrectly uses a product or service,
you may need to help that person better understand the correct use of
that product or service. In such a circumstance, remember that your
customer or client believes that his or her claim is justified. Therefore,
you should give the explanation before granting the claim—otherwise,
your reader may never get to the explanation. If your explanation es-
tablishes customer responsibility, do so tactfully. Figure A–7 is an ex-
ample of a partial adjustment letter. See also correspondence.
adverbs
An adverb modifies the action or condition expressed by a verb.
(cid:2) The wrecking ball hit the side of the building hard.
[The adverb tells howthe wrecking ball hit the building.]
An adverb also can modify an adjective, another adverb, or a clause.
(cid:2) The brochure design used remarkablybright colors.
[Remarkablymodifies the adjective bright.]

=== Page 53 ===
HTW_ch0A.qxp 8/25/08 8:40 AM Page 20
20 adverbs
A
(cid:2) The redesigned brake pad lasted muchlonger.
[Muchmodifies the adverb longer.]
(cid:2) Surprisingly, the engine failed.
[Surprisinglymodifies the clause the engine failed.]
Types of Adverbs
A simple adverb can answer one of the following questions:
Where?(adverb of place)
(cid:2) Move the display forwardslightly.
When?or How often? (adverb of time)
(cid:2) Replace the thermostat immediately.
(cid:2) I worked overtime twicethis week.
How?(adverb of manner)
(cid:2) Add the solvent cautiously.
How much?(adverb of degree)
(cid:2) The nearlycompleted report was sent to the director.
An interrogative adverb can ask a question (Where? When? Why?
How?):
(cid:2) Howmany hours did you work last week?
(cid:2) Whywas the hard drive reformatted?
A conjunctive adverb can modify the clause that it introduces as well
as join two independent clauses with a semicolon. The most common
conjunctive adverbs are however, nevertheless, moreover, therefore,
further, then, consequently, besides, accordingly, also, and thus.
(cid:2) I rarely work on weekends; however, this weekend will be an
exception.
In this example, note that a semicolon precedes and a comma follows
however. The conjunctive adverb (however) introduces the independent
clause (this weekend will be an exception) and indicates its relationship
to the preceding independent clause (I rarely work on weekends). See
also transition.
Comparison of Adverbs
Most one-syllable adverbs show comparison with the suffixes -er and
-est.

=== Page 54 ===
HTW_ch0A.qxp 8/25/08 8:40 AM Page 21
affect/ effect 21
A
(cid:2) This copier is fast. [positive form]
(cid:2) This copier is fasterthan the old one. [comparative form]
(cid:2) This copier is the fastestof the three tested. [superlative form]
Most adverbs with two or more syllables end in -ly, and most adverbs
ending in -lyare compared by inserting the comparative moreor lessor
the superlative mostor leastin front of them.
(cid:2) The patient recovered more quicklythan the staff expected.
(cid:2) Most surprisingly, the engine failed during the final test phase.
A few irregular adverbs require a change in form to indicate compari-
son (well, better, best; badly, worse, worst; far, farther, farthest).
(cid:2) The training program functions well.
(cid:2) Our training program functions betterthan most others in the
industry.
(cid:2) Many consider our training program the bestin the industry.
Placementof Adverbs
An adverb usually should be placed in front of the verb it modifies.
(cid:2) The pilot methodicallyperformed the preflight check.
An adverb may, however, follow the verb (or the verb and its object)
that it modifies.
(cid:2) The system failed unexpectedly.
(cid:2) They replaced the hard drive quickly.
An adverb may be placed between a helping verb and a main verb.
(cid:2) In this temperature range, the pressure will quicklydrop.
Adverbs such as only, nearly, almost, just, and hardlyshould be placed
immediately before the words they limit. See also modifiersand only.
affect / effect
Affect is a verb that means “influence.” (“The decision could affect the
company’s stock value.”) Effectcan function as a nounthat means “re-
sult” (“The decision had a positive effect”) or as a verb that means

=== Page 55 ===
HTW_ch0A.qxp 8/25/08 8:40 AM Page 22
22 affectation
A
“bring about” or “cause.” However, avoid effect as a verb when you
can replace it with a less formal word, such as makeor produce.
make
(cid:2) The new technician will effectseveral changes to network security.
^
affectation
Affectation is the use of language that is more formal, technical, or
showy than necessary to communicate information to the reader. Affec-
tation is a widespread writing problem in the workplace because many
people feel that affectation lends a degree of authority to their writing.
In fact, affectation can alienate customers, clients, and colleagues.
Affected writing forces readers to work harder to understand the
writer’s meaning. It typically contains inappropriate abstract, highly
technical, or foreign words and is often liberally sprinkled with trendy
buzzwords.
ETHICS NOTE Jargon and euphemisms can become affectation, espe-
cially if their purpose is to hide relevant facts or give a false impression
of competence. See ethics in writing. ✦
Writers easily slip into affectation through the use of long vari-
ants—words created by adding prefixes and suffixes to simpler words
(orientate for orient; utilization for use). Unnecessarily formal words
(such as penultimatefor next to last), created words using -ese(such as
managementese), and outdated words (such as aforesaid) can produce
affectation. (See also above.) Elegant variation—attempting to avoid
repeating a word within a paragraph by substituting a pretentious syn-
onym—is also a form of affectation. Either repeat the term or use a
pronoun.
(cid:2) The use of modules in the assembly process has increased produc-
, and it
tion. Modular utilizationhas alsocut costs.
^
Another type of affectation is gobbledygook, which is wordy, round-
about writing with many legal- and technical-sounding terms (such as
whereinand morphing).
WEB LINK Affected Writing Revised
For an example of regulations thatare revised to eliminate various
forms of affectation,see bedfordstmartins.com/alredtechand select
Model Documents Gallery.

=== Page 56 ===
HTW_ch0A.qxp 8/25/08 8:40 AM Page 23
agreement 23
A
Understanding the possible reasons for affectation is the first step
toward avoiding it. The following are some causes of affectation.
• Impression. Some writers use pretentious language in an attempt
to impress the reader with fancy words instead of evidence and
logic.
• Insecurity. Writers who are insecure about their facts, conclusions,
or arguments may try to hide behind a smoke screen of pretentious
words.
• Imitation.Perhaps unconsciously, some writers imitate the poor
writing they see around them.
• Intimidation.A few writers, consciously or unconsciously, try to
intimidate or overwhelm their readers with words, often to protect
themselves from criticism.
• Initiation.Writers who are new to a field often feel that one way to
prove their professional expertise is to use as much technical termi-
nology and jargon as possible.
• Imprecision.Writers who are having trouble being precise some-
times find that an easy solution is to use a vague, trendy, or
pretentious word.
See also clichés, conciseness, and nominalizations.
affinity
Affinity refers to the attraction of two persons or things to each other.
Affinityshould not be used to mean “ability” or “aptitude.”
aptitude
(cid:2) She has an affinityfor problem solving.
^
agreement
DIRECTORY
Subject-Verb Agreement 24
Compound Subjects 26
Pronoun-AntecedentAgreement 27
Grammatical agreement is the correspondence in form between different
elements of a sentence to indicate number, person, gender, and case.

=== Page 57 ===
HTW_ch0A.qxp 8/25/08 8:40 AM Page 24
24 agreement
A
A subject and its verbmust agree in number.
(cid:2) The design isacceptable.
[The singular subject, design, requires the singular verb, is.]
(cid:2) The new products aregoing into production soon.
[The plural subject, products, requires the plural verb, are.]
A subject and its verb must agree in person.
(cid:2) I amthe designer.
[The first-person singular subject, I, requires the first-person singu-
lar verb, am.]
(cid:2) They arethe designers.
[The third-person plural subject, they, requires the third-person
plural verb, are.]
A pronoun and its antecedent must agree in person, number, gender,
and case.
(cid:2) The employeesreport that theyare more efficient in the new facility.
[The third-person plural subject, employees, requires the third-
person plural pronoun, they.]
(cid:2) Kaye McGuirewill meet with the staff on Friday, when shewill
assign duties.
[The third-person singular subject, Kaye McGuire, requires she, the
third-person feminine pronoun, in the subjective case.]
See also sentence construction.
Subject-Verb Agreement
Subject-verb agreement is not affected by intervening phrases and
clauses.
(cid:2) Onein twenty hard drives we receive from our suppliers isfaulty.
[The verb, is, must agree in number with the subject, one, not hard
drivesor suppliers.]
The same is true when nounsfall between a subject and its verb.
(cid:2) Only oneof the emergency lights wasfunctioning.
[The subject of the verb is one, not lights.]
(cid:2) Eachof the switches controlsa separate circuit.
[The subject of the verb is each, not switches.]
Note that oneand eachare normally singular.

=== Page 58 ===
HTW_ch0A.qxp 8/25/08 8:40 AM Page 25
agreement 25
A
Indefinite pronouns such as some, none, all, more, and most may
be singular or plural, depending on whether they are used with a mass
noun (“Mostof the oil hasbeen used”) or with a count noun (“Mostof
the drivers know why they are here”). Mass nouns are singular, and
count nouns are plural. Other words, such as type, part, series, and por-
tion, take singular verbs even when they precede a phrase containing a
plural noun.
(cid:2) A seriesof meetings washeld to improve the product design.
(cid:2) A large portionof most annual reports isdevoted to promoting the
corporate image.
Modifying phrases can obscure a simple subject.
(cid:2) The adviceof two engineers, one lawyer, and three executives was
obtained prior to making a commitment.
[The subject of the verb wasis advice.]
Inverted word order can cause problems with agreement.
(cid:2) From this work have comeseveral important improvements.
[The subject of the verb is improvements, not work.]
The number of a subjective complement does not affect the number of
the verb—the verb must always agree with the subject.
(cid:2) The topicof his report isemployee benefits.
[The subject of the sentence is topic, not benefits.]
A subject that expresses measurement, weight, mass, or total often
takes a singular verb even when the subject word is plural in form. Such
subjects are treated as a unit.
(cid:2) Four weeks isthe normal duration of the training program.
A verb following the relative pronoun who or that agrees in number
with the noun to which the pronoun refers (its antecedent).
(cid:2) Steel is one of those industriesthat aremost affected by global
competition. [Thatrefers to industries.]
(cid:2) She is one of those employeeswho arerarely absent.
[Whorefers to employees.]
The word number sometimes causes confusion. When used to mean a
specific number, it is singular.
(cid:2) Thenumberof committee members wassix.

=== Page 59 ===
HTW_ch0A.qxp 8/25/08 8:40 AM Page 26
26 agreement
A
When used to mean an approximate number, it is plural.
(cid:2) A numberof people werewaiting for the announcement.
Relative pronouns (who, which, that) may take either singular or plural
verbs, depending on whether the antecedent is singular or plural. See
also who / whom.
(cid:2) He is a manager who seeksthe views of others.
(cid:2) He is one of those managers who seekthe views of others.
Some abstract nouns are singular in meaning but plural in form: mathe-
matics, news, physics, and economics.
(cid:2) Mathematics is essential in computer science.
Some words, such as the plural jeans and scissors, cause special prob-
lems.
(cid:2) The scissors wereordered last week.
[The subject is the plural scissors.]
(cid:2) A pairof scissors ison order.
[The subject is the singular pair.]
A book with a plural title requires a singular verb.
(cid:2) Basic Medical Laboratory Techniquesis an essential resource.
A collective noun (committee, faculty, class, jury) used as a subject
takes a singular verb when the group is thought of as a unit and a
plural verb when the individuals in the group are thought of separately.
(cid:2) The committee isunanimous in its decision.
(cid:2) The committee arereturning to their offices.
A clearer way to emphasize the individuals would be to use a phrase.
(cid:2) The committee members arereturning to their offices.
Compound Subjects
A compound subject is composed of two or more elements joined by a
conjunctionsuch as and, or, nor, either . . . or, or neither . . . nor. Usu-
ally, when the elements are connected by and, the subject is plural and
requires a plural verb.
(cid:2) Professional writing and translation areprerequisites for this
position.

=== Page 60 ===
HTW_ch0A.qxp 8/25/08 8:40 AM Page 27
agreement 27
A
One exception occurs when the elements connected by andform a unit
or refer to the same thing. In that case, the subject is regarded as singu-
lar and takes a singular verb.
(cid:2) Bacon and eggs isa high-cholesterol meal.
(cid:2) Our greatest challenge and business opportunityis the Internet.
A compound subject with a singular element and a plural element
joined by oror norrequires that the verb agree with the closer element.
(cid:2) Neither the director nor the project assistants wereavailable.
(cid:2) Neither the project assistants nor the director wasavailable.
If each or every modifies the elements of a compound subject, use the
singular verb.
(cid:2) Eachmanager and supervisor hasa production goal to meet.
(cid:2) Everymanager and supervisor hasa production goal to meet.
Pronoun-AntecedentAgreement
Every pronoun must have an antecedent—a noun to which it refers.
See also pronoun reference.
(cid:2) When employeesare hired, theymust review the policy manual.
[The pronoun theyrefers to the antecedent employees.]
Gender. A pronoun must agree in gender with its antecedent.
(cid:2) Mr. Swivetin the accounting department acknowledges hisshare of
responsibility for the misunderstanding, just as Ms. Barkleyin the
research division must acknowledge hers.
Traditionally, a masculine, singular pronoun was used to agree with
such indefinite antecedents as anyone and person (“Each may stay or
go as hechooses”). Because such usage ignores or excludes women, use
alternatives when they are available. One solution is to use the plural.
Another is to use both feminine and masculine pronouns, although that
combination is clumsy when used too often.
All employees their cards
(cid:2) Every employeemust sign histime card.
^ ^ ^
or her
(cid:2) Every employee must sign his time card.
^

=== Page 61 ===
HTW_ch0A.qxp 8/25/08 8:40 AM Page 28
28 agreement
A
Do not attempt to avoid expressing gender by resorting to a plural pro-
noun when the antecedent is singular. You may be able to avoid the
pronoun entirely.
a
(cid:2) Every employee must sign theirtime card.
^
Avoid gender-related stereotypes in general references, as in “the
nurse...she” or “the doctor...he.” What if the nurse is male or the
doctor female? See also biased language.
Number. A pronoun must agree with its antecedent in number. Many
problems of agreement are caused by expressions that are not clear in
number.
(cid:2) Although the typical engine runs well in moderate temperatures,
it stalls
theyoften stallin extreme cold.
^ ^
Use singular pronouns with the antecedents everybody and everyone
unless to do so would be illogical because the meaning is obviously
plural. See also everybody / everyone.
(cid:2) Everyonepulled his or hershare of the load.
(cid:2) Everyonethought my plan should be revised, and I really couldn’t
blame them.
Collective nouns may use a singular or plural pronoun, depending on
the meaning.
(cid:2) The committeeagreed to the recommendations only after ithad
deliberated for days.
[committeethought of as collective singular]
(cid:2) The committeequit for the day and went to theirrespective homes.
[committeethought of as plural]
Demonstrative adjectives sometimes cause problems with agreement of
number. This and that are used with singular nouns, and these and
those are used with plural nouns. Demonstrative adjectives often cause
problems when they modify the nouns kind, type, and sort. When used
with those nouns, demonstrative adjectives should agree with them in
number.
(cid:2) thiskind, thesekinds; thattype, thosetypes
Confusion often develops when the preposition of is added (this kind
of, these kinds of) and the object of the preposition does not agree in
number with the demonstrative adjective and its noun.

=== Page 62 ===
HTW_ch0A.qxp 8/25/08 8:40 AM Page 29
all ready / already 29
A
plan is
(cid:2) This kind of retirement plans arebest.
^
Avoid that error by remembering to make the demonstrative adjective,
the noun, and the object of the preposition—all three—agree in num-
ber. The agreement makes the sentence not only correct but also more
precise. Using demonstrative adjectives with words like kind, type, and
sortcan easily lead to vagueness. See kind of / sortof.
Compound Antecedents. A compound antecedent joined by or or nor
is singular if both elements are singular and plural if both elements are
plural.
(cid:2) Neither the engineernor the techniciancould do hisjob until he
understood the new concept.
(cid:2) Neither the executivesnor the directorswere pleased at the perfor-
mance of theircompany.
When one of the antecedents connected by oror noris singular and the
other plural, the pronoun agrees with the closer antecedent.
(cid:2) Either the computeror the printersshould have theirserial num-
bers registered.
(cid:2) Either the printersor the computershould have itsserial number
registered.
A compound antecedent with its elements joined by and requires a
plural pronoun.
(cid:2) Seon JuandJuanitatook theirlayout drawings with them.
If both elements refer to the same person, however, use the singular pro-
noun.
(cid:2) The noted biologist and authordeparted from herprepared
speech.
all ready / already
All ready is a two-word phrase meaning “completely prepared.” Al-
ready is an adverb that means “before this time” or “previously.”
(“They were all ready to cancel the order; fortunately, we had already
corrected the shipments.”)

=== Page 63 ===
HTW_ch0A.qxp 8/25/08 8:40 AM Page 30
30 all right
A
all right
All rightmeans “all correct.” (“The answers were all right.”) In formal
writing, it should not be used to mean “good” or “acceptable.” It is al-
ways written as two words, with no hyphen; alrightis nonstandard.
all together / altogether
All togethermeans “all acting together” or “all in one place.” (“The nec-
essary instruments were all together on the tray.”) Altogether means
“entirely” or “completely.” (“The trip was altogetherunnecessary.”)
allude / elude / refer
Alludemeans to make an indirect reference to something. (“The report
simply alluded to the problem, rather than stating it explicitly.”) Elude
means to escape notice or detection. (“The leak eludedthe inspectors.”)
Refer is used to indicate a direct reference to something. (“She referred
to the merger during her presentation.”)
allusion / illusion
An allusion is an indirect reference to something not specifically men-
tioned. (“The report made an allusion to metal fatigue in the support
structures.”) An illusion is a mistaken perception or a false image.
(“County officials are under the illusion that the landfill will last in-
definitely.”)
allusions
An allusion is an indirect reference to something from past or current
events, literature, or other familiar sources. The use of allusion pro-
motes economical writing because it is a shorthand way of referring to
a body of material in a few words or of helping to explain a new and
unfamiliar process in terms of one that is familiar. In the following ex-
ample, the writer sums up a description with an allusion to a well-

=== Page 64 ===
HTW_ch0A.qxp 8/25/08 8:40 AM Page 31
also 31
A
known story. The allusion, with its implicit reference to “right standing
up to might,” concisely emphasizes the writer’s point.
(cid:2) As it currently exists, the review process involves the consumer’s
attorney sitting alone, usually without adequate technical assis-
tance, faced by two or three government attorneys, two or three
attorneys from CompuSystems, and large teams of experts who
support the government and the corporation. The entire proceed-
ing is reminiscent of David versus Goliath.
Be sure, of course, that your reader is familiar with the material to
which you allude. Allusions should be used with restraint, especially
in international correspondence. If overdone, allusions can lead to af-
fectation or can be viewed merely as clichés. See also technical writing
style.
almost / most
Do not use mostas a colloquial substitute for almostin your writing.
almost
(cid:2) New shipments arrive mostevery day.
^
also
Alsois an adverbthat means “additionally.” (“Two 5,000-gallon tanks
are on-site, and several 2,500-gallon tanks are also available.”) Also
should not be used as a connective in the sense of “and.”
and
(cid:2) He brought the reports, the memos, alsothe director’s
^
recommendations.
Avoid opening sentences with also. It is a weak transitional word that
suggests an afterthought rather than planned writing.
In addition
(cid:2) Also, he brought a cost analysis to support his proposal.
^
He also
(cid:2) Also, hebrought a cost analysis to support his proposal.
^

=== Page 65 ===
HTW_ch0A.qxp 8/25/08 8:40 AM Page 32
32 ambiguity
A
ambiguity
A word or passage is ambiguous when it can be interpreted in two or
more ways, yet it provides the reader with no certain basis for choosing
among the alternatives.
(cid:2) Mathematics is more valuable to an engineer than a computer.
[Does that mean an engineer is more in need of mathematics than a
computer is? Or does it mean that mathematics is more valuable to
an engineer than a computer is?]
Ambiguity can take many forms, as in ambiguous pronoun reference.
AMBIGUOUS Inadequate quality-control procedures have resulted
in more equipment failures. This is our most serious
problem at present.
[Does thisrefer to inadequatequality-control proce-
duresor to equipment failures?]
SPECIFIC Inadequate quality-control procedures have resulted
in more equipment failures. These failuresare our
most serious problem at present.
SPECIFIC Inadequate quality-control procedures have resulted
in more equipment failures. Quality controlis our
most serious problem at present.
Incomplete comparison and missing or misplaced modifiers (including
dangling modifiers) cause ambiguity.
(cid:2) Ms. Lee values rigid quality-control standards more than Mr.
does
Rosenblum. [Complete the comparison.]
^
also
(cid:2) He lists his hobby as cooking. Heis especially fond of cocker
^
spaniels. [Add the missing modifier.]
The placement of some modifiers enables them to be interpreted in ei-
ther of two ways.
(cid:2) She volunteered immediatelyto deliver the toxic substance.
By moving the word immediately, the meaning can be clarified.
(cid:2) She immediatelyvolunteered to deliver the toxic substance.
(cid:2) She volunteered to deliver the toxic substanceimmediately.
Imprecise word choice(including faulty idioms) can cause ambiguity.

=== Page 66 ===
HTW_ch0A.qxp 8/25/08 8:40 AM Page 33
antonyms 33
A
(cid:2) The general manager has denied reports that the plant’s recent fuel-
rescinded
allocation cut will be restored. [inappropriate word choice]
^
Various forms of awkwardnessalso can cause ambiguity.
amount / number
Amountis used with things that are thought of in bulk and that cannot
be counted (mass nouns), as in “the amount of electricity.” Number is
used with things that can be counted as individual items (count nouns),
as in “the numberof employees.”
ampersands
The ampersand (&) is a symbol sometimes used to represent the word
and, especially in the names of organizations (Kirkwell & Associates).
When you are writing the name of an organization in sentences, ad-
dresses, or references, spell out the word and unless the ampersand ap-
pears in the organization’s official name on its letterhead stationery or
Web site.
and/or
And/ormeans that either both circumstances are possible or only one of
two circumstances is possible. This term is awkward and confusing be-
cause it makes the reader stop to puzzle over your distinction.
AWKWARD Use A and/orB.
IMPROVED Use A or B or both.
antonyms
An antonym is a word with a meaning opposite that of another word
(good/bad, wet/dry, fresh/stale). Many pairs of words that look as if
they are antonyms, such as limit/delimit, are not. When in doubt, con-
sult thesauruses and print or online dictionariesfor antonyms as well as
synonyms.

=== Page 67 ===
HTW_ch0A.qxp 8/25/08 8:40 AM Page 34
34 apostrophes
A
apostrophes
An apostrophe (’) is used to show possession or to indicate the omission
of letters. Sometimes it is also used to avoid confusion with certain plu-
rals of words, letters, and abbreviations.
Showing Possession
An apostrophe is used with an s to form the possessive case of some
nouns (the report’s title). For further advice on using apostrophes to
show possession, see possessive case.
Indicating Omission
An apostrophe is used to mark the omission of letters or numbers in a
contractionor a date (can’t, I’m, I’ll; the class of ’09).
Forming Plurals
An apostrophe can be used in forming the plurals of letters, words, or
lowercase abbreviations if confusion might result from using salone.
(cid:2) The search program does not find a’s and i’s.
(cid:2) Do not replace all of which’s in the document.
(cid:2) I’s need to be distinguished from the number 1.
(cid:2) Check for any c.o.d.’s.
Generally, however, add only s in roman (or regular) type when refer-
ring to words as words or capital letters. See also italics.
(cid:2) Five ands appear in the first sentence.
(cid:2) The applicants received As and Bs in their courses.
Do not use an apostrophe for plurals of abbreviations with all capital
letters (PDFs) or a final capital letter (ten Ph.D.s) or for plurals of num-
bers (7s, the late 1990s).
appendixes
An appendix, located at the end of a formal report, proposal, or other
long document, supplements or clarifies the information in the body of
the document. Appendixes (or appendices) can provide information
that is too detailed or lengthy for the primary audience of the docu-

=== Page 68 ===
HTW_ch0A.qxp 8/25/08 8:40 AM Page 35
application letters 35
A
ment. For example, an appendix could contain such material as maps,
statistical analysis, résumés of key personnel involved in a proposed
project, or other documents needed by secondary readers.
A document may have more than one appendix, with each provid-
ing only one type of information. When you include more than one ap-
pendix, arrange them in the order they are mentioned in the body of the
document. Begin each appendix on a new page, and identify each with
a letter, starting with the letter A (Appendix A: Sample Questionnaire).
If you have only one appendix, title it simply “Appendix.” List the titles
and beginning page numbers of the appendixes in the table of contents.
application letters
When applying for a job, you usually need to submit both an applica-
tion letter (also referred to as a cover letter) and a résumé. Employers
may ask you to submit them by standard mail, online form, fax, or
e-mail. See also job searchand letters.
The application letter is essentially a sales letter in which you mar-
ket your skills, abilities, and knowledge. Therefore, your application
letter must be persuasive. The successful application letter accomplishes
four tasks: (1) It catches the reader’s attention favorably by describing
how your skills will contribute to the organization, (2) it explains
which particular job interests you and why, (3) it convinces the reader
that you are qualified for the job by highlighting and interpreting the
particularly impressive qualifications in your résumé, and (4) it requests
an interview. See also correspondence, interviewing for a job, persua-
sion, and salary negotiations.
The sample application letters shown in Figures A–8 through A–10
follow the structure described in this entry. Each sample’s emphasis,
tone, and styleare tailored to fit the applicant’s experience and the par-
ticular audience. Note that the letter shown in Figure A–9 matches the
résumé in Figure R–7 (“Joshua S. Goodman”) and the letter sent as an
e-mail in Figure A–10 matches the résumé in Figure R–8 (“Robert
Mandillo”).
Opening
In the opening paragraph, provide contextby indicating how you heard
about the position and name the specific job title or area. If you have
been referred to a company by an employee, a career counselor, a pro-
fessor, or someone else, be sure to say so. (“I have recently learned from
Jodi Hammel, a graphic designer at Dyer/Khan, that you are recruit-
ing....”) Show enthusiasm by explaining why you are interested in the

=== Page 69 ===
HTW_ch0A.qxp 8/25/08 8:40 AM Page 36
36 application letters
A
From: Molly Sennett<sennett@execpr.com>
To: Bob Lupert<lupert@appliedsciences.com>
Sent: Monday,February 23,2009 10:47 AM
Subject: Application for Summer Internship
Attachment: Sennett_Resume.pdf
Dear Mr.Lupert:
In the February 19 issue of the Butler Gazette,I learned
thatyou have summer technical training internships
available.This opportunity interests me because I have
learned thatApplied Sciences has one of the leading user-
education centers in the country.
From your Web site,I have also learned thatyou value
collaborative and leadership skills.My currentprojectat
Penn State University—a computer tutoring system that
teaches LISP—has helped me to develop these skills.This
tutoring system,which I helped develop as partof a stu-
dentengineering team,is the firstof its kind and is now
being sold across the country to various corporations and
universities.As partof the team,I solved specific prob-
lems and then helped testand revise our work to improve
efficiency.
Pursuing degrees in Industrial Managementand Com-
puter Science has prepared me well to make valuable
contributions to your goal of successful implementation
of new software.Through my varied courses,which are
described on my résumé,I have developed the ability to
learn new skills quickly and independently and to interact
effectively in a technical environment.I would look for-
ward to applying these abilities to user education at
Applied Sciences,Inc.
I would appreciate the chance to interview with you at
your earliestconvenience.If you would like additional
information,please contactme at(435) 228-3490 any
Tuesday or Thursday after 10 a.m.or e-mail me at
<sennett@execpr.com>.
Thank you for your consideration.
Sincerely,
Molly Sennett
FIGUREA–8. Application Letter Sentas E-mail (College StudentApplying for an
Internship)

=== Page 70 ===
HTW_ch0A.qxp 8/25/08 8:40 AM Page 37
application letters 37
A
222 Morewood Ave.
Pittsburgh, PA 15212
April 16, 2009
Ms. Judith Castro, Director
Human Resources
Natural History Museum
1201 S. Figueroa Street
Los Angeles, CA 90015
Dear Ms. Castro:
I have recently learned from Jodi Hammel, a graphic designer at Dyer/
Khan, that you are recruiting for a graphic designer in your Marketing
Department. Your position interests me greatly because it offers me an
opportunity both to fulfill my career goals and to promote the work of an
internationally respected institution. Having participated in substantial
volunteer activities at a local public museum, I am aware of the impor-
tance of your work.
I bring strong up-to-date academic and practical skills in multimedia tools
and graphic arts production, as indicated in my enclosed résumé. Further,
I have recent project management experience at Dyer/Khan, where I was
responsible for the development of client brochures, newsletters, and
posters. As project manager, I coordinated the project time lines, budgets,
and production with clients, staff, and vendors.
My experience and contacts in the Los Angeles area media and entertain-
ment community should help me make use of state-of-the-art design
expertise. As you will see on my résumé, I have worked with the leading
motion picture, television, and music companies—that experience should
help me develop exciting marketing tools Museum visitors and patrons will
find attractive. For example, I helped design an upgrade of the CGI logo for
Paramount Pictures and was formally commended by the Director of
Marketing.
Could we schedule a meeting at your convenience to discuss this position
further? Call me any weekday morning at 412-555-1212 (cell) or e-mail
me at <jgoodman@aol.com> if you have questions or need additional
information. Thank you for your consideration.
Sincerely,
Joshua S. Goodman
Joshua S. Goodman
Enclosure: Résumé
FIGURE A–9. Application Letter (RecentGraduate Applying for a Graphic Design Job)

=== Page 71 ===
HTW_ch0A.qxp 8/25/08 8:40 AM Page 38
38 application letters
A
Dear Ms. Smathers:
During the recent NOMAD convention in Washington, Karen
Jarrett, Director of Operations, informed me of a possible opening
at Aerospace Technologies for a manager of new product
development. My extensive background in engineering exhibit
design and management makes me an ideal candidate for the
position she described.
I have been manager of the Exhibit Design Lab at Wright-Patterson
Air Force Base for the past seven years. During that time, I received
two Congressional Commendations for models of a space station
laboratory and a docking/repair port. My experience in advanced
exhibit design would give me a special advantage in helping
develop AT’s wind tunnel and aerospace models. Further, I have
just learned this week that my exhibit design presented at NOMAD
received a “Best of Show” Award.
As described on the enclosed résumé, I not only have workplace
management experience but also have recently received an MBA
from the University of Dayton. As a student in the MBA program,
I won the Luson Scholarship to complete my coursework as well
as the Jonas Outstanding Student Award.
I would be happy to discuss my qualifications in an interview at
your convenience. Please telephone me at (937) 255-4137 or e-mail
me at <mand@juno.com>. I look forward to talking with you.
Sincerely,
Robert Mandillo
FIGURE A–10. Application Letter (Applicantwith Years of Experience)
job and demonstrate your initiative as well as your knowledge of the
organization by relating your interest to some facet of the organization.
(“This opportunity interests me because I have learned that Applied Sci-
ences has one of the leading user-education centers in the country.”)
Body
In the middle paragraphs, show through examples that you are quali-
fied for the job. Limit each of these paragraphs to just one basic point
that is clearly stated in the topic sentence. For example, your second
paragraph might focus on work experience and your third paragraph
on educational achievements. Do not just tellreaders that you are qual-
ified—show them by including examples and details. (“I helped design

=== Page 72 ===
HTW_ch0A.qxp 8/25/08 8:40 AM Page 39
articles 39
A
an upgrade of the CGI logo for Paramount Pictures and was formally
commended by the Director of Marketing.”) Highlight your achieve-
ments and refer to your enclosed résumé, but do not simply summarize
your résumé. Indicate how your talents can make valuable contribu-
tions to the company.
Closing
In the final paragraph, request an interview. Let the reader know how
to reach you by including your phone number or e-mail address. End
with a statement of goodwill, even if only a “thank you.”
Proofread your letter carefully. Research indicates that if employers
notice even one spelling, grammatical, or mechanical error, they often
eliminate candidates from consideration immediately. Such errors give
employers the impression that you lack writing skills or that you are care-
less in the way you present yourself professionally. See also proofreading.
appositives
An appositive is a noun or noun phrase that follows and amplifies an-
other noun or noun phrase. It has the same grammatical function as the
noun it complements.
(cid:2) Dennis Gabor, the famous British scientist, developed holography
as an “exercise in serendipity.”
(cid:2) The famous British scientist Dennis Gabordeveloped holography
as an “exercise in serendipity.”
For detailed information on the use of commaswith appositives, see re-
strictive and nonrestrictive elements.
If you are in doubt about the caseof an appositive, check it by sub-
stituting the appositive for the noun it modifies. See also pronouns.
me
(cid:2) My boss gave the two of us, Jim andI, the day off.
^
[You would not say, “My boss gave I the day off.”]
articles
Articles (a, an, the) function as adjectivesbecause they modify the items
they designate by either limiting them or making them more specific.
Articles may be indefinite or definite.

=== Page 73 ===
HTW_ch0A.qxp 8/25/08 8:40 AM Page 40
40 articles
A
ESL TIPSfor Using Articles
Whether to use a definite or an indefinite article is determined by what
you can safely assume about your audience’s knowledge. In each of
these sentences,you can safely assume thatthe reader can clearly iden-
tify the noun.Therefore,use a definite article.
(cid:2) Thesun rises in the east.
[The Earth has only one sun.]
(cid:2) Did you know that yesterday was thecoldest day of the year so far?
[The modified noun refers to yesterday.]
(cid:2) Theman who left his briefcase in the conference room was in a
hurry.
[The relative phrase who left his briefcase in the conference room
restricts and, therefore, identifies the meaning of man.]
In the following sentence,however,you cannotassume thatthe reader
can clearly identify the noun.
(cid:2) Apackage is on the way.
[It is impossible to identify specifically what package is meant.]
A more importantquestion for some nonnative speakers of English
is when notto use articles.These generalizations will help.Do notuse
articles with the following:
Singular proper nouns
(cid:2) Utah, Main Street, Harvard University, Mount Hood
Plural nonspecific countnouns (when making generalizations)
(cid:2) Helicopters are the new choice of transportation for the rich and
famous.
Singular mass nouns
(cid:2) She loves chocolate.
Plural countnouns used as complements
(cid:2) Those women are physicians.
See also English as a second language.
The indefinite articles, aand an, denote an unspecified item.
(cid:2) Apackage was delivered yesterday. [nota specific package]
The choice between a and an depends on the sound rather than on the
letter following the article, as described in the entry a/an.

=== Page 74 ===
HTW_ch0A.qxp 8/25/08 8:40 AM Page 41
as much as / more than 41
A
The definite article, the, denotes a particular item.
(cid:2) Thepackage was delivered yesterday. [onespecific package]
Do not omit all articles from your writing in an attempt to be concise.
Including articles costs nothing; eliminating them makes reading more
difficult. (See also telegraphic style.) However, do not overdo it. An ar-
ticle can be superfluous.
(cid:2) Fill with ahalf apint of fluid.
[Choose one article and eliminate the other.]
Do not capitalize articles in titles except when they are the first word
(“The Scientistreviewed Saving the Humboldt Penguin”).
as / because / since
As, because, and since are commonly used to mean “because.” To ex-
press cause, because is the strongest and most specific connective; be-
cause is unequivocal in stating a causal relationship. (Because she did
not have an engineering degree, she was not offered the job.)
Since is a weak substitute for because as a connective to express
cause. However, since is an appropriate connective when the emphasis
is on circumstance, condition, or time rather than on cause and effect.
(Sinceit went public, the company has earned a profit every year.)
As is the least definite connective to indicate cause; its use for that
purpose is best avoided. See also subordination.
Avoid colloquial, nonstandard, or wordy phrases sometimes used
instead of as, because, or since. See also as much as/more than, as such,
as well as, conciseness, and due to / because of.
PHRASE REPLACE WITH
being as,being that because,since
inasmuch as,insofar as since,because
on accountof because
on the grounds of/that because
due to the factthat because,since
as much as / more than
The phrases as much as and more than are sometimes incorrectly com-
bined, especially when intervening phrases delay the completion of the
phrase.

=== Page 75 ===
HTW_ch0A.qxp 8/25/08 8:40 AM Page 42
42 as such
A
(cid:2) The engineers had as much, if not more,influence in planning
as , if not more
the program thanthe accountants.
^ ^
as such
The phrase as suchis seldom useful and should be omitted.
(cid:2) Style sheets, as such,are useful in designing Web pages.
as well as
Do not use as well as with both. The two expressions have similar
meanings; use one or the other and adjust the verb as needed.
and are
(cid:2) Both General Motors as well asFord ismarketing hybrid vehicles.
^ ^
(cid:2) BothGeneral Motors as well as Ford is marketing hybrid vehicles.
audience
Considering the needs of your audience is crucial to achieving your pur-
pose. When you are writing to a specific reader, for example, you may
find it useful to visualize a reader sitting across from you as you write.
(See correspondence.) Likewise, when writing to an audience composed
of relatively homogeneous readers, you might create an image of a com-
posite reader and write for that reader. In such cases, using the “you”
viewpointand an appropriate tonewill help you meet the needs of your
readers as well as achieve an effective technical writing style. For meet-
ing the needs of an audience composed of listeners, see presentations.
Analyzing Your Audience’s Needs
The first step in analyzing your audience is to determine the readers’
needs relative to your purpose and goals. Ask key questions during
preparation.
• Who specifically is your reader? Do you have multiple readers?
Who needs to see or use the document?

=== Page 76 ===
HTW_ch0A.qxp 8/25/08 8:40 AM Page 43
augment/ supplement 43
A
• What do your readers already know about your subject? What are
your readers’ attitudes about the subject? (Skeptical? Supportive?
Anxious? Bored?)
• What particular information about your readers (experience, train-
ing, and work habits, for example) might help you write at the
appropriate level of detail?
• What does the contextsuggest about meeting the readers’ expecta-
tions for content or layoutand design?
• Do you need to adapt your message for international readers? If
so, see global communication, global graphics, and international
correspondence.
In the workplace, your readers are usually less familiar with the subject
than you are. You have to be careful, therefore, when writing on a topic
that is unique to your area of specialization. Be sensitive to the needs of
those whose training or experience lies in other areas; provide defini-
tions of nonstandard terms and explanations of principles that you, as a
specialist, take for granted. See also definingterms.
Writing for Diverse Audiences
For documents aimed at multiple audiences with different needs, con-
sider segmenting the document for different groups of readers: an exec-
utive summary for top managers, an appendix with detailed data for
technical specialists, and the body for those readers who need to make
decisions based on a detailed discussion. See also formal reports and
proposals.
When you have multiple audiences with various needs but cannot
segment your document, first determine your primary or most im-
portant readers—such as those who will make decisions based on the
document—and be sure to meet their needs. Then, meet the needs of
secondary readers, such as those who need only some of the document’s
contents, as long as you do not sacrifice the needs of your primary
readers. See also persuasion and “Five Steps to Successful Writing”
(page xv).
augment / supplement
Augment means to increase or magnify in size, degree, or effect. (“Our
retirees can augment their incomes through consulting.”) Supplement
means to add something to make up for a deficiency. (“The patient
should supplementhis diet with vitamins.”)

=== Page 77 ===
HTW_ch0A.qxp 8/25/08 8:40 AM Page 44
44 average / median / mean
A
average / median / mean
The average(or arithmetic mean) is determined by adding two or more
quantities and dividing the sum by the number of items totaled. For ex-
ample, if one report is 10 pages, another is 30 pages, and a third is 20
pages, their average length is 20 pages. It is incorrect to say that “each
report averages 20 pages” because each report is a specific length.
The three reports average
(cid:2) Each report averages20 pages.
^
The medianis the middle number in a sequence of numbers. For exam-
ple, the medianof the series 1, 3, 4, 7, 8 is 4.
awhile / a while
The adverb awhile means “for a short time.” The preposition for
should not precede awhile because for is inherent in the meaning of
awhile. The two-word noun phrasea whilemeans “a period of time.”
(cid:2) Wait forawhile before testing the sample.
a while
(cid:2) Wait for awhilebefore testing the sample.
^
awkwardness
Any writing that strikes readers as awkward—that is, as forced or un-
natural—impedes their understanding. The following checklist and the
entries indicated will help you smooth out most awkward passages.
WRITER’S CHECKLIST Eliminating Awkwardness
(cid:3)
Strive for clarityand coherenceduring revision.
(cid:3)
Check for organizationto ensure your writing develops logically.
(cid:3)
Keep sentence constructionas directand simple as possible.
(cid:3)
Use subordinationappropriately and avoid needless repetition.
(cid:3)
Correctany logic errorswithin your sentences.
(cid:3)
Revise for concisenessand avoid expletiveswhere possible.
(cid:3)
Use the active voiceunless you have a justifiable reason to use the
passive voice.
(cid:3)
Eliminate jammed or misplaced modifiersand,for particularly awk-
ward constructions,apply the tactics in garbled sentences.

=== Page 78 ===
6860ch0B.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:47 AM Page 45
B
B
bad / badly
Bad is the adjective form that follows such linking verbs as feel and
look. (“We don’t want to look badat the meeting.”) Badlyis an adverb.
(“The iron frame corroded badly.”) To say “I feel badly” would mean,
literally, that your sense of touch is impaired. See also good / well.
be sure to
The phrasebe sure andis colloquial and unidiomatic when used for be
sure to. See also idioms.
to
(cid:2) When you sign the contract, be sure andkeep a copy.
^
beside / besides
Besides, meaning “in addition to” or “other than,” should be carefully
distinguished from beside, meaning “next to” or “apart from.” (“Besides
two of us from Radiology, three interns from Neurology stood beside
the director during the ceremony.”)
between / among
Betweenis normally used to relate two items or persons. (“The alloy of-
fers a middle ground between durability and cost.”) Among is used to
relate more than two. (“The subcontracting was distributed amongthree
firms.”) Amongstis a variant, chiefly British spelling.
45

=== Page 79 ===
6860ch0B.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:47 AM Page 46
46 between you and me
B between you and me
The expression between you and I is incorrect. Because the pronouns
are objects of the preposition between, the objective form of the per-
sonal pronoun (me) must be used. See also case.
me
(cid:2) Between you andI, Joan should be promoted.
^
bi- / semi-
When used with periods of time, bi- means “two” or “every two,” as in
bimonthly, which means “once in two months.” When used with peri-
ods of time, semi- means “half of” or “occurring twice within a period
of time.” Semimonthlymeans “twice a month.” Both bi- and semi- nor-
mally are joined with the following element without a space or hyphen.
biannual / biennial
In conventional usage, biannualmeans “twice during the year,” and bi-
ennialmeans “every other year.” See also bi- / semi-.
biased language
Biased language refers to words and expressions that offend because
they make inappropriate assumptions or stereotypes about gender, eth-
nicity, physical or mental disability, age, or sexual orientation. Biased
language, which is often used unintentionally, can defeat your purpose
by damaging your credibility.
ETHICS NOTE The easiest way to avoid bias is simply not to mention
differences among people unless the differences are relevant to the dis-
cussion. Keep current with accepted usage and, if you are unsure of the
appropriateness of an expression or the tone of a passage, have several
colleagues review the material and give you their assessments. ✦
SexistLanguage
Sexist language can be an outgrowth of sexism, the arbitrary stereotyp-
ing of men and women—it can breed and reinforce inequality. To avoid

=== Page 80 ===
6860ch0B.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:47 AM Page 47
biased language 47
sexism in your writing, treat men and women equally, and do not make B
assumptions about traditional or occupational roles. Accordingly, use
nonsexist occupational descriptions in your writing.
INSTEAD OF CONSIDER
chairman,chairwoman chair,chairperson
foreman supervisor,manager
man-hours staff hours,worker hours
policeman,policewoman police officer
salesman,saleswoman salesperson
Use parallel terms to describe men and women.
INSTEAD OF USE
ladies and men ladies and gentlemen;
women and men
man and wife husband and wife
Ms.Jones and Bernard Weiss Ms.Jones and Mr.Weiss;
Mary Jones and Bernard Weiss
Sexism can creep into your writing by the unthinking use of male
or female pronounswhere a reference could apply equally to a man or a
woman. One way to avoid such usage is to rewrite the sentence in the
plural.
All employees their managers their travel vouchers.
(cid:2) Every employeewill have his managersign his travel voucher.
^ ^ ^
Other possible solutions are to use his or her instead of his alone or to
omit the pronoun completely if it is not essential to the meaning of the
sentence. See also he / sheand pronoun reference.
Other Types of Biased Language
Identifying people by racial, ethnic, or religious categories is simply not
relevant in most workplace writing. Telling readers that an accountant
is Native American or an attorney is Jewish almost never conveys useful
information. Linking a profession or characteristic to race or ethnicity
reinforces stereotypes, implying that it is either rare or expected for a
person of a particular background to have achieved a certain position.
Consider how you refer to people with disabilities. If you refer to
“a disabled employee,” you imply that the part (disabled) is as signifi-
cant as the whole (employee). Use “an employee with a disability” in-
stead. Similarly, the preferred usage is “a person who uses a wheelchair”
rather than “a wheelchair-bound person,” an expression that inappro-
priately equates the wheelchair with the person. Likewise, references to

=== Page 81 ===
6860ch0B.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:47 AM Page 48
48 bibliographies
B a person’s age can be inappropriate, as in expressions like “middle-aged
manager” or “young Web designer.”
In most workplace writing, such issues are simply not relevant. Of
course, in some contexts, race, ethnicity, religion, disability, or age
should be identified. For example, if you are writing an Equal Employ-
ment Opportunity Commission report about your firm’s hiring prac-
tices, the racial composition of the workforce is relevant. In such cases,
you need to present the issues in ways that respect and do not demean
the individuals or groups to which you refer. See also ethics in writing.
bibliographies
A bibliography is an alphabetical list of books, articles, Web sources,
and other works that have been consulted in preparing a document or
that are useful for reference purposes. A bibliography provides a conve-
nient alphabetical listing of sources in a standardized form for readers
interested in getting further information on the topic or in assessing the
scope of the research.
Whereas a list of references or works cited refers to works actually
cited in the text, a bibliography also includes works consulted for gen-
eral background information. For information on using various citation
styles, see documenting sources.
Entries in a bibliography are listed alphabetically by the author’s
last name. If an author is unknown, the entry is alphabetized by the first
word in the title (other than A, An, or The). Entries also can be arranged
by subject and then ordered alphabetically within those categories.
An annotated bibliography includes complete bibliographic infor-
mation about a work (author, title, place of publication, publisher, and
publication date) followed by a brief description or evaluation of what
the work contains. The following is an annotation of a book on style
and format:
Sabin, William A. The Gregg Reference Manual: A Manual of
Style, Grammar, Usage, and Formatting.10th ed. New York:
McGraw Hill/Irwin, 2005.
The tenth edition of this standard 688-page office guide “is in-
tended for anyone who writes, edits, or prepares material for
distribution or publication” (p. viii). The book begins with a
section titled How to Look Things Up, which includes a refer-
ence to an online index at www.gregg.com. Part 1, Grammar,
Usage, and Style, contains 11 sections on topics such as punctu-
ation, abbreviations, spelling, and usage. Part 2, Techniques and
Formats, contains seven sections on such topics as proofreading,

=== Page 82 ===
6860ch0B.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:47 AM Page 49
blogs 49
correspondence (letters, memos, and e-mail), and other elements B
of manuscript preparation. Part 3, References, includes four ap-
pendixes: several essays on style, rules for alphabetic filing, a
glossary of grammatical terms, and an alphabetical list offering
appropriate pronunciation for words used in business, legal,
and professional contexts.
blogs
A blog* is a Web-based journal in which “bloggers” can post entries
(displayed from the most recent to the initial posting) that express opin-
ions, provide information, and respond to other bloggers on subjects of
mutual interest. An individual, for example, might create a blog not
only to document life experiences, including amusing stories or reac-
tions to current events, but also to market career skills and even post a
résuméfor a job search. A group of cancer patients might create a blog
to share their treatment and recovery processes with other Web readers,
who can then post their own comments or advice.
The usefulness of a blog stems in large part from the resources that
bloggers offer their readers to help them access additional information,
such as by posting links to relevant Web sites and documents as well as
to video, audio, and other interactive files.
Organizational Blogs
Organizations create blogs to help meet such goals as attracting and re-
taining clients or customers, promoting goodwill, obtaining valuable
feedback on their products and services, and even developing a sense of
community among their customers and employees. Unlike Web sites,
which usually present a formal perspective of an organization, blogs
provide an informal and interactive forum for organizations to commu-
nicate directly with target audiences. Organizations can create both ex-
ternal and internalblogs.
External blogsare publicly available on the Internet both for an or-
ganization’s customers or clients and for executives, spokespeople, or
employees to share their views. The informal environment of blogs
helps to build credibility for an organization because customers know
they can “chat” with an organization’s representative and exchange
current information instead of relying on information in published
*The word blogis a shortened form of Web log; estimates suggest that there are over
70 million blogs. One way to start your own blog is through Google Blogger at
www.blogger.com/start.

=== Page 83 ===
6860ch0B.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:47 AM Page 50
50 blogs
B
FIGUREB–1. Corporate Blog
documents and on Web sites. For example, General Motors (GM) has
an external blog in which GM employees can post the latest informa-
tion about their products, such as where customers can test drive a new
concept car, as well as read and respond to the opinions from bloggers
about those products. Figure B–1 shows a corporate blog that includes
comments from the GM Director of Global Communications Technol-
ogy and postings by bloggers.
Internal blogs are usually created for employees and can be ac-
cessed only through the organization’s intranet. Such internal blogs may
serve as newslettersand achieve the following organizational goals:

=== Page 84 ===
6860ch0B.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:47 AM Page 51
blogs 51
• Provide feedback opportunities through a forum to openly discuss B
issues or concerns
• Encourage employee participation in upcoming events or initiatives
• Share employee and community news, such as birth announce-
ments and charitable events
Writing for Organizational Blogs
Write blog entries in an informal, personal style that uses contractions,
second person, and active voice.
(cid:2) “Check out the latest concept for our new dashboards—we’ve
added more space. Is the console large enough to hold your
Starbucks and iPod? Tell us what you think.”
When writing blog entries, keep your sentences and paragraphs short.
As in writing for the Web, use concisenessand brief entries to help read-
ers scan the text to find information that is interesting or relevant to
them. Use bulleted lists, italics, and other layoutand design elements,
such as boldface and white space, to organize the content. Headlines
that are short and direct also catch attention and increase the blog’s vi-
sual appeal and readability.
Provide access to additional information from your blog. For ex-
ample, if you post a blog entry about your company’s opinion of a re-
port released from the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), include a
Web link to the report on the FDA’s Web site or post the report as a
downloadable document. Clearly identify the sources of your ideas and
attribute quotationsaccordingly.
The Wall Street Journal
(cid:2) A national newspaperreported today that Smith Company’s stock
^
will likely rise.
Tim Smith
(cid:2) A guyin Marketing said the company picnic will start at noon.
^
As a representative of your organization, sign your posting with your
full name and your position title. Unlike outside bloggers who often use
pseudonyms, identifying yourself helps maintain your credibility as well
as your company’s. Much of the appeal of a corporate blog is that cus-
tomers can communicate directly with identifiable company representa-
tives, not with anonymous people whose credentials within the company
are unknown.
ETHICS NOTE Because organizations expect employees to assume full
responsibility for the content they post on a company blog, you must
maintain high ethical standards.

=== Page 85 ===
6860ch0B.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:47 AM Page 52
52 both...and
B • Do not post information that is confidential, proprietary, or sensi-
tive to your employer.
• Do not attack competitors or other individuals (such as employees,
other bloggers, or shareholders).
• Do not post content that is profane, libelous, or harassing, or that
violates the privacy of others. See also biased language.
• Obtain permission, as needed, for any material that is protected by
copyright. See also plagiarism. ✦
Before publishing your entry to the blog, proofread carefully for gram-
mar, typos, and formatting errors. Also obtain your supervisor’s approval
of the content before publishing to ensure that the content, tone, and
Web links are compatible with company policies. See also proofreading.
both . . . and
Statements using the both...and construction should always be bal-
anced grammatically and logically. See also parallel structure.
(cid:2) To succeed in engineering, you must be able bothto develop
to master
writing skills and masteringmathematics.
^
brackets
The primary use of brackets ([ ]) is to enclose a word or words inserted
by the writer or editor into a quotation.
(cid:2) The text stated, “Hypertext systems can be categorized as either
modest [not modifiable] or robust [modifiable].”
Brackets are used to set off a parenthetical item within parentheses.
(cid:2) We must credit Emanuel Foose (and his brother Emilio
[1912–1982]) for founding the institute.
Brackets are also used to insert the Latin word sic, which is a scholarly
abbreviationthat indicates a writer has quoted material exactly as it ap-
pears in the original, even though it contains a misspelled or wrongly
used word. See also quotations.
(cid:2) The contract states, “Tinted windows will be installed to protect
against son [sic] damage.”

=== Page 86 ===
6860ch0B.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:47 AM Page 53
brainstorming 53
brainstorming B
Brainstorming, a form of free association used to generate ideas about a
topic, can be done individually or in groups. Brainstorming can stimu-
late creative thinking and reveal fresh perspectives and new connections.
When preparing to write, jot down as many random ideas as you can
think of about the topic. When a group brainstorms, designate a person
to note ideas the group suggests. Do not stop to analyze ideas or hold
back looking for only the “best” ideas; just note everything that comes
to mind. After compiling a list of initial ideas, ask what, when, who,
where, how, and whyfor each idea, then list additional details that those
questions bring to mind. When you run out of ideas, analyze each one
you recorded, discarding those that are redundant. Then group the items
in the most logical order, based on the purposeof the document and the
needs of the audience to create a tentative outline of the document. Al-
though the outline will be sketchy and incomplete, it will show where
further brainstorming or research is needed and provide a framework
for any new details that additional research yields. (See outlining.)
Many writers find a technique called clustering (also called mind
mapping), as shown in Figure B–2, helpful in recording and organizing
TV
Radio Newspapers
Advertising
Customer
Conferences
communication Internet
and trade shows
Web
page
E-mail
Direct mail
Product Company
and updates
Flyers Technical Newsletters service
info
support surveys
FIGUREB–2. Cluster Map from a Brainstorming Session

=== Page 87 ===
6860ch0B.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:47 AM Page 54
54 brochures
B ideas created during a brainstorming session. To cluster, begin with a
blank sheet of paper or a flip chart. Think of a key term that best char-
acterizes your topic and put it in a circle at the center of the paper. Fig-
ure B–2 shows brainstorming about the best way to communicate with
customers, so that topic could be “Customer communication.” Then
think of subtopics most closely related to the main topic. In Figure B–2,
the main topic (“Customer communication”) might lead to such sub-
topics as “Advertising,” “Internet,” and “Direct mail.” Draw circles or
boxes around the subtopics, connecting each to the center circle, like
spokes to a wheel hub. Repeat the exercise for each subtopic. In Fig-
ure B–2, for example, one subtopic is “Internet,” which could stimulate
additional subtopics such as “E-mail” and “Web page.” Continue the
process until you exhaust all possible ideas. The resulting “map” will
show clusters of terms grouped around the central concept from which
you can create a topic outline.
brochures
Brochures are printed publications that promote the products and ser-
vices offered by a business or that promote the image of a business or
an organization by providing general or specific technical information
important to a target audience. The goal of a brochure is to inform or
to persuade or to do both. See also persuasion.
Types of Brochures
The two major types of brochures are sales brochures and informa-
tional brochures. Sales brochures are created specifically to sell a com-
pany’s products and services. A technically oriented sales brochure can
promote the performance data of various models of a product or list the
benefits or capabilities of different types of equipment available for spe-
cific jobs. For example, the brochure of a microwave oven manufac-
turer might describe the various models and their accessories and how
the ovens are to be installed over stove tops. Informational brochures
are created to inform and to educate the reader as well as to promote
goodwill and to raise the profile of an organization. For example, an in-
formational brochure for a pesticide company might show the reader
how to identify various types of pests like silverfish and termites, detail
the damage they can do, and explain how to protect your home from
them.
Designing the Brochure
Before you begin to write, determine the specific purpose of the
brochure—to provide information about a service? to sell a product?

=== Page 88 ===
6860ch0B.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:47 AM Page 55
brochures 55
You must also identify your target audience—general reader? expert? B
potential or existing client? Understanding your purpose, audience, and
context is essential to creating content and a design that will be both
appropriate and persuasive to your target audience. To help you de-
velop an effective design and to stimulate your thinking, gather sample
brochures for products or services similar to yours.
Cover Panel. The main goal of the cover panel is to gain the audience’s
attention. It should clearly identify the organization or product being
promoted and provide a carefully selected visual image or headline
geared toward the interest of the audience. Keep the amount of text to a
minimum—for example, a statement about the organization’s mission
and success or a brief promotional quotation from a satisfied customer.
Figure B–3 shows the cover panel
of a brochure produced by the
National Cancer Institute, which
hopes to attract health-care pro-
fessionals to an online course on
conducting clinical trials in their
practices. The cover photo fea-
tures a health-care professional
who appears to be counseling a
patient; the text briefly defines
the course, provides a Web ad-
dress, and identifies the sponsor-
ing organization.
First Inside Panel. The first in-
side panel of a brochure should
again identify the organization
and attract the reader with head-
lines and brief, readable content,
such as that used in advertising.
The first inside panel of the Na-
tional Cancer Institute brochure
uses boldface headings to high-
light brief descriptions of the
course and those participants
who may benefit.
SubsequentPanels. Subsequent
panels should describe the prod-
uct or service with the reader’s
needs in mind, clearly stating
the benefits and solutions to FIGUREB–3. Brochure (Cover Panel)

=== Page 89 ===
6860ch0B.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:47 AM Page 56
56 brochures
B problems that your product or service offers. Include relevant and accu-
rate supporting facts and visuals. You might further establish credibility
with a brief company or product history or with a list of current clients
or testimonials. Use subheadings and bulleted lists to break up the text
and highlight key points. In the final panel, be clear about the action
you want the reader to take, such as calling to order the product or vis-
iting a Web site for more information. In Figure B–4, the second inside
panel describes the course objectives and tells readers how to register.
Design Style and Unity. Develop a style that unifies and complements
the content of your brochure, and use it consistently throughout. For
example, a brochure for a cruise line would feature many attractive
photos of passengers and scenery. A brochure related to a serious med-
FIGUREB–4. Brochure (Inside Panels)

=== Page 90 ===
6860ch0B.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:47 AM Page 57
buzzwords 57
ical subject, as in Figures B–3 and B–4, might use images of profession- B
als in workplace settings. See also layoutand design.
WRITER’S CHECKLIST Designing a Brochure
(cid:3)
Collectother brochures to stimulate your thinking as you consider the
goals and contentfor your brochure and each panel.
(cid:3)
Create a rough sketch thatmaps outthe contentof each panel to
help you selectvisuals,color schemes,and the number of panels.
(cid:3)
Experimentwith margins,spacing,and the arrangementand amount
of texton each panel;make appropriate changes to contentor length
and allow adequate white space for readability.
(cid:3)
Experimentwith fonts and formatting,such as enlarging the firstlet-
ter of the firstword in a paragraph,butdo notoveruse unusual fonts
or alternative styles,such as running type vertically.
(cid:3)
Consider color choices:black and white,which is cheaper than color,
can be effective;in some circumstances,however,color is a must.
(cid:3)
Evaluate the impactof the design with your content.Have you ade-
quately considered the needs of your audience?
(cid:3)
Consider using a professional printer and high-quality paper,depend-
ing on your budgetand the scale of your project.
WEB LINK Sample Brochures
For links to Web sites with sample brochures,see bedfordstmartins
.com/alredtechand selectLinks for Handbook Entries.
bulleted lists (see lists)
buzzwords
Buzzwords are words or phrases that suddenly become popular and,
because of an intense period of overuse, lose their freshness and precise-
ness. They may become popular through their association with technol-
ogy, popular culture, or even sports.
(cid:2) interface [as a verb] deliverables slam dunk
impact[as a verb] 24/7 data dump
cyberslackers dot-com action items

=== Page 91 ===
6860ch0B.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:47 AM Page 58
58 buzzwords
B Obviously, the words in this example are appropriate in the right con-
text.
(cid:2) We must establish an interfacebetween the computer and the satel-
lite hardware.
[Interfaceis appropriately used as a noun.]
When writers needlessly shift from the normal function of a word,
however, they often create a buzzword that is imprecise.
cooperate
(cid:2) We must interfacewith the Radiology Department.
^
[Interfaceis inappropriately used as a verb; cooperateis more
precise.]
We include such words in our vocabulary because they seem to give
force and vitality to our language. Actually, buzzwords often sound pre-
tentious in technical writing. See also word choice.
WEB LINK Buzzwords
Former newspaper editor John Walston offers BuzzWhack,a light-
hearted site “dedicated to demystifying buzzwords.”See
bedfordstmartins.com/alredtechand selectLinks for Handbook
Entries.

=== Page 92 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:48 AM Page 59
C
C
can / may
In writing, can refers to capability (“I can have the project finished
today”). Mayrefers to possibility (“I maybe in Boston on Monday”) or
permission (“MayI leave early?”).
cannot
Cannot is one word.
cannot
(cid:2) We can notmeet the deadline specified in the contract.
^
capitalization
DIRECTORY
Proper Nouns 59 Specific Institutions,Events,Concepts 61
Common Nouns 60 Titles of Works 61
FirstWords 60 Professional and Personal Titles 62
Specific Groups 60 Abbreviations and Letters 62
Specific Places 60 Miscellaneous Capitalizations 62
The use of capital, or uppercase, letters is determined by custom. Capi-
tal letters are used to call attention to certain words, such as proper
nouns and the first word of a sentence. Use capital letters carefully be-
cause they can affect a word’s meaning (march / March, china / China)
and because a spell checker would fail to identify such an error.
Proper Nouns
Capitalize proper nouns that name specific persons, places, or things
(Pat Wilde, Peru, Technical Writing 205, Microsoft). Proper nouns that
59

=== Page 93 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:48 AM Page 60
60 capitalization
form other parts of speech are often capitalized (Keynesian economics,
Boolean function, Balkanize), but you should check a current dictionary.
C
Common Nouns
Common nouns name general classes or categories of people, places,
things, concepts, or qualities rather than specific ones and are not capi-
talized (technical writing class, company, person, country).
FirstWords
The first letter of the first word in a sentence is always capitalized. (“Of
the plans submitted, ours is best.”) The first word after a colonis capital-
ized when the colon introduces two or more sentences (independent
clauses) or if the colon precedes a statement requiring special emphasis.
(cid:2) The meeting will address only one issue: What is the firm’s role in
environmental protection?
If a subordinate element follows the colon or if the thought is closely re-
lated, use a lowercase letter following the colon.
(cid:2) We kept working for one reason: the approaching deadline.
The first word of a complete sentence in quotation marksis capitalized.
(cid:2) Albert Einstein stated, “Imagination is more important than
knowledge.”
The first word in the salutation (Dear Mr. Smith:) and complimentary
close (Sincerely yours,) are capitalized, as are the names of the recipi-
ents. See also letters.
Specific Groups
Capitalize the names of ethnic groups, religions, and nationalities (Na-
tive American, Christianity, Mongolian). Do not capitalize the names of
social and economic groups (middle class, unemployed).
Specific Places
Capitalize the names of all political divisions (Ward Six, Chicago, Cook
County, Illinois) and geographical divisions (Europe, Asia, North
America, the Middle East). Do not capitalize geographic features unless
they are part of a proper name.
(cid:2) The mountains in some areas, such as the Great Smoky
Mountains, make radio transmission difficult.

=== Page 94 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:48 AM Page 61
capitalization 61
The words north, south, east, and west are capitalized when they refer
to sections of the country. They are not capitalized when they refer to
directions. C
(cid:2) I may relocate further west, but my family will remain in the
South.
Capitalize the names of stars, constellations, and planets.
(cid:2) NorthStar, Andromeda, Saturn
Do not capitalize earth, sun, and moonexcept when they are referred to
formally as astronomical bodies.
(cid:2) My workday was so long that I saw the sunrise over the lake and
the moonappear as darkness settled over the earth.
(cid:2) The various effects of the Sunon Earthand the Moonwere dis-
cussed at the symposium.
Specific Institutions,Events,Concepts
Capitalize the names of institutions, organizations, and associations
(U.S. Department of Health and Human Services). An organization usu-
ally capitalizes the names of its internal divisions and departments
(Aeronautics Division, Human Resources Department). Types of orga-
nizations are not capitalized unless they are part of an official name (a
technical communication association; Society for Technical Communi-
cation). Capitalize historical events (the Great Depression of the
1930s). Capitalize words that designate holidays, specific periods of
time, months, or days of the week (Labor Day, the Renaissance, Janu-
ary, Monday). Do not capitalize seasons of the year (spring, summer,
autumn, winter).
Capitalize the scientific names of classes, families, and orders but
not the names of species or English derivatives of scientific names
(Mammalia/mammal, Carnivora/carnivorous).
Titles of Works
Capitalize the initial letters of the first, last, and major words in the title
of a book, an article, a play, or a film. Do not capitalize articles (a, an,
the), coordinating conjunctions (and, but), or prepositions unless they
begin or end the title (The Lives of a Cell). Capitalize prepositions
within titles when they contain five or more letters (Between, Within,
Until, After), unless you are following a style that recommends other-
wise. The same rules apply to the subject lines of e-mailsor memos.

=== Page 95 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:48 AM Page 62
62 case
Professional and Personal Titles
Titles preceding proper names are capitalized (Ms. Berger, Senator
C
Lieberman). Appositives following proper names normally are not capi-
talized (Joseph Lieberman, senator from Connecticut). However, the
word President is often capitalized when it refers to the chief executive
of a national government. See appositives.
Job titles used with personal names are capitalized (Ho-shik Kim,
Laboratory Director). Job titles used without personal names are not
capitalized. (“The laboratory director will meet us tomorrow.”) Use
capital letters to designate family relationships only when they occur
before a name (my uncle, Uncle Fred).
Abbreviations and Letters
Capitalize abbreviations if the words they stand for would be capital-
ized, such as B.S.Ch.E. (Bachelor of Science in Chemical Engineering).
Capitalize letters that serve as names or indicate shapes (vitamin B,
T-square, U-turn, I-beam).
Miscellaneous Capitalizations
The first word of a complete sentence enclosed in dashes, brackets, or
parentheses is not capitalized when it appears as part of another sen-
tence.
(cid:2) We must improve our safety record this year (accidents last year
were up 10 percent).
Certain units, such as parts and chapters of books and rooms in build-
ings, when specifically identified by number, are capitalized (Chapter 5,
Ch. 5; Room 72, Rm. 72). Minor divisions within such units are not
capitalized unless they begin a sentence (page 11, verse 14, seat 12).
case
DIRECTORY
Subjective Case 63 Appositives 65
Objective Case 64 Determining the Case of Pronouns 65
Possessive Case 64
Grammatical case indicates the functional relationship of a noun or a
pronoun to the other words in a sentence. Nouns change form only in

=== Page 96 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:48 AM Page 63
case 63
the possessive case; pronouns may show change for the subjective, the
objective, or the possessive case.
The case of a noun or pronoun is always determined by its function C
in a phrase, clause, or sentence. If it is the subject of a phrase, clause, or
sentence, it is in the subjective case; if it is an objectin a phrase, clause,
or sentence, it is in the objective case; if it reflects possession or owner-
ship and modifies a noun, it is in the possessive case. Figure C–1 is a
table of pronouns in the subjective, objective, and possessive cases. See
also sentence construction.
SINGULAR SUBJECTIVE OBJECTIVE POSSESSIVE
First person I me my, mine
Second person you you your, yours
Third person he, she, it him, her, it his, her, hers, its
PLURAL SUBJECTIVE OBJECTIVE POSSESSIVE
First person we us our, ours
Second person you you your, yours
Third person they them their, theirs
FIGUREC–1. Pronoun-Case Chart
The subjective case can indicate the person or thing acting (“He
sued the vendor”), the person or thing acted upon (“He was sued by the
vendor”), or the topic of description (“He is the vendor”). The objec-
tive case can indicate the thing acted on (“The vendor sued him”) or the
person or thing acting but in the objective position (“The vendor was
sued by him”). (See also voice.) The possessive case indicates the person
or thing owning or possessing something (“It was his company”). See
also modifiers.
Subjective Case
A pronoun is in the subjective case (also called nominative case) when it
represents the person or thing acting or is the receiver of the action even
though it is in the subject position.
(cid:2) Iwrote a proposal.
(cid:2) I was praised for my proposal writing.
A linking verblinks a pronoun to its antecedent to show that they iden-
tify the same thing. Because they represent the same thing, the pronoun
is in the subjective case even when it follows the verb, which makes it a
subjective complement.

=== Page 97 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:48 AM Page 64
64 case
(cid:2) He is the head of the Quality Control Group. [subject]
(cid:2) The head of the Quality Control Group is he.
C
[subjective complement]
The subjective case is used after the words than and as because of the
understood (although unstated) portion of the clauses in which those
words appear.
(cid:2) George is as good a designer as I [am].
(cid:2) Our subsidiary can do the job better than we [can].
Objective Case
A pronoun is in the objective case (also called the accusative case) when
it indicates the person or thing receiving the action that is expressed by
a verb in the active voice.
(cid:2) They selected me to attend the conference.
Pronouns that follow action verbs (which excludes all forms of the verb
be) must be in the objective case. Do not be confused by an additional
name.
(cid:2) The company promoted me in July.
(cid:2) The company promoted John and me in July.
A pronoun is in the objective case when it is the object of a gerund or
prepositionor the subject of an infinitive.
(cid:2) Between you and me, his facts are questionable.
[objects of a preposition]
(cid:2) Many of us attended the conference. [object of a preposition]
(cid:2) Training him was the best thing I could have done.
[object of a gerund]
(cid:2) We asked them to return the deposit. [subject of an infinitive]
English does not differentiate between direct objects and indirect ob-
jects; both require the objective form of the pronoun. See also comple-
ments.
(cid:2) The interviewer seemed to like me. [direct object]
(cid:2) They wrote me a letter. [indirect object]
Possessive Case
A noun or pronoun is in the possessive case when it represents a person,
place, or thing that possesses something. To make a singular noun

=== Page 98 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:48 AM Page 65
case 65
possessive, add ’s (the manufacturer’s robotic inventory system). With
plural nouns that end in s, show the possessive by placing an apostro-
phe after the s that forms the plural (a managers’ meeting). For other C
guidelines, see possessive case.
Appositives
An appositive is a noun or noun phrase that follows and amplifies an-
other noun or noun phrase. Because it has the same grammatical func-
tion as the noun it complements, an appositive should be in the same
case as the noun with which it is in apposition.
(cid:2) Two nurses, Jim Knight and I, were asked to review the patient’s
chart. [subjective case]
(cid:2) The group leader selected two members to represent the depart-
ment—Mohan Pathak and me. [objective case]
Determining the Case of Pronouns
One test to determine the proper case of a pronoun is to try it with
some transitive verb such as resembled or hit. If the pronoun would log-
ically precede the verb, use the subjective case; if it would logically fol-
low the verb, use the objective case.
(cid:2) She [He, They] resembled her father. [subjective case]
(cid:2) Angela resembled him [her, them]. [objective case]
In the following example, try omitting the noun to determine the case
of the pronoun.
SENTENCE (We / Us) pilots fly our own airplanes.
INCORRECT Us fly our own airplanes.
[This incorrect usage is obviously wrong.]
CORRECT We fly our own airplanes.
[This correct usage sounds right.]
To determine the case of a pronoun that follows as or than, mentally
add the words that are omitted but understood.
(cid:2) The other technical writer is not paid as well as she [is paid].
[You would not write, “Her is paid.”]
(cid:2) His partner was better informed than he [was informed].
[You would not write, “Him was informed.”]
If pronouns in compound constructions cause problems, try using them
singly to determine the proper case.

=== Page 99 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:48 AM Page 66
66 cause-and-effectmethod of development
SENTENCE (We/Us) and the clients are going to lunch.
CORRECT We are going to lunch.
C [You would not write, “Us are going to lunch.”]
For advice on when to use who and whom, see who / whom.
cause-and-effect method of development
The cause-and-effect method of development is a common strategy to
explain why something happened or why you think something will hap-
pen. The goal of the cause-and-effect method of development is to make
as plausible as possible the relationship between a situation and either
its cause or its effect. The conclusions you draw about the relationships
should be based on evidence you have gathered. Like all methods, this
one is often used in combination with others. If you were examining a
problem with multiple causes, for example, you might combine cause-
and-effect with order-of-importance method of development as you ex-
amine each cause and its effect.
Evaluating Evidence
Because not all evidence you gather will be of equal value, keep in mind
the following guidelines:
• Your facts and arguments should be relevant to your topic. Be
careful not to draw a conclusion that your evidence does not lead
to or support. You may have researched some statistics, for example,
showing that an increasing number of Americans are licensed to fly
small airplanes. You cannot use that information as evidence for a
decrease in new car sales in the United States—the evidence does
not lead to that conclusion.
• Your evidence should be adequate.Incomplete evidence can lead to
false conclusions.
(cid:2) Driver-training classes do not help prevent auto accidents. Two
people I know who completed driver-training classes were in-
volved in accidents.
A thorough investigation of the usefulness of driver-training classes
in keeping down the accident rate would require more than one
or two examples. It would require a systematic comparison of the
driving records for a representative sample of drivers who had
completed driver training and those who had not.
• Your evidence should be representative.If you conduct a survey to
obtain your evidence, do not solicit responses only from individu-

=== Page 100 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:48 AM Page 67
center on 67
als or groups whose views are identical to yours; be sure you
obtain responses from a diverse population.
• Your evidence should be demonstrable. Two events that occur C
close to each other in time or place may or may not be causally
related. For example, that new traffic signs were placed at an inter-
section and the next day an accident occurred does not necessarily
prove that the signs caused the accident. You must demonstrate the
relationship between the two events with pertinent facts and argu-
ments. See logic errors.
Linking Causes to Effects
To show a true relationship between a cause and an effect, you must
demonstrate that the existence of the one requires the existence of the
other. It is often difficult to establish beyond any doubt that one event
was the cause of another event. More often, a result will have more
than one cause. As you research a subject, your task is to determine
which cause or causes are most plausible.
When several probable causes are equally valid, report your find-
ings accordingly, as in the following excerpt from an article on the use
of an energy-saving device called a furnace-vent damper. The damper is
a metal plate that fits inside the flue or vent pipe of a natural-gas or
fuel-oil furnace to allow poisonous gases to escape up the flue. Tests run
on several dampers showed a number of probable causes for their mal-
functioning.
(cid:2) One damper was sold without proper installation instructions, and
another was wired incorrectly. Two of the units had slow-opening
dampers (15 seconds) that prevented the [furnace] burner from
firing. And one damper jammed when exposed to a simulated fuel
temperature of more than 700 degrees.
—Don DeBat, “Save Energy but Save Your Life, Too,” Family Safety
The investigator located more than one cause of damper malfunctions
and reported on them. Without such a thorough account, recommenda-
tions to prevent malfunctions would be based on incomplete evidence.
center on
Use the phrase center on in writing, not center around. (“The experi-
ments center onthe new discovery.”) Often the idea intended by center
onis better expressed by other words.
dealt with
(cid:2) The hearings on computer security centered onaccess codes.
^

=== Page 101 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:48 AM Page 68
68 chronological method of development
chronological method of development
C
The chronological method of development arranges the events under
discussion in sequential order, emphasizing time as it begins with the
first event and continues chronologically to the last. Trip reports, labora-
tory reports, work schedules, some minutes of meetings, and certain
trouble reports are among the types of writing in which information is
organized chronologically. Chronological order is typically used in nar-
ration.
The trouble report shown in Figure C–2 describes the development
of a fire at an industrial facility. After providing important background
information, the writer presents both the events and the steps taken in
chronological order.
cite / sight / site
Citemeans “acknowledge” or “quote an authority.” (“The speaker cited
several ecology experts.”) Sight is the ability to see. (“He feared that he
might lose his sight.”) Site is a plot of land (a construction site) or the
place where something is located (a Web site).
clarity
Clarity is essential to effective communication with your readers. You
cannot achieve your purpose or a goal like persuasion without clarity.
Many factors contribute to clarity, just as many other elements can de-
feat it.
A logical method of development and an outline will help you
avoid presenting your reader with a jumble of isolated thoughts. A
method of development and an outline that puts your thoughts into a
logical, meaningful sequence brings coherence as well as unity to your
writing. Clear transitioncontributes to clarity by providing the smooth
flow that enables the reader to connect your thoughts with one another
without conscious effort. See also outlining.
Proper emphasis and subordination are mandatory if you want to
achieve clarity. If you do not use those two complementary techniques
wisely, all your clauses and sentences will appear to be of equal impor-
tance. Your reader will only be able to guess which are most important,
which are least important, and which fall somewhere in between. The
paceat which you present your ideas is also important to clarity; if the

=== Page 102 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:48 AM Page 69
chronological method of development 69
Memorandum C
To: Charles Artmier, Chairman, Safety Committee
From: Willard Ricke, Plant Superintendent, Sequoia Plant WR
Date: November 17, 2009
Subject: Fire at our Sequoia Plant in Ardville
The following description provides an account of the conditions and
development of the fire at our Sequoia Plant in Ardville. Because
this description will be incorporated in the report that the Safety
Committee will prepare, please let me know if any details should be
added or clarified.
Three piles of scrap paper were located about 100 feet south of
Building A and 150 feet west of Building B at our Sequoia Chemical
Plant in Ardville. Building A, which consisted of one story and a par-
tial attic, was used in part as an electrical shop and in part for equip-
ment storage. Six pallets of Class I flammable liquids in 55-gallon
drums were temporarily stored just outside Building A, along its
west wall.
A spark created in the electrical shop in Building A started a
fire. The night watchman first noticed the fire in the electrical shop
at about 6:00 a.m. and immediately called the fire department and
the plant superintendent. Before the fire department arrived, the fire
spread to the drums of flammable liquid just outside the west wall
and quickly engulfed Building A in flames. The fire then spread to
the scrap paper outside, with a 40 mph wind blowing it in the direc-
tion of Building B.
During this time, the watchman began to hose down the piles
of scrap paper between the buildings to try to keep the fire from
reaching Building B. He also set up lawn sprinklers between the fire
and Building B as part of his attempt to protect Building B from the
fire. However, he saw smoke coming from Building B at 6:15 a.m.,
in spite of his best efforts to protect it.
The volunteer fire department, which was 20 miles away,
reached the scene at 6:57 a.m., nearly an hour after the fire was dis-
covered. It is estimated that the fire department’s pumps were
started after the fire had been burning in Building B for at least 20
minutes.
Building A was destroyed, along with its contents, and the fire
burned into the hollow joisted roof of Building B, which sustained a
$250,000 loss....
FIGUREC–2. Chronological Method of Development

=== Page 103 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:48 AM Page 70
70 clauses
pace is not carefully adjusted to both the topic and the reader, your
writing will appear cluttered and unclear.
C Pointof viewestablishes through whose eyes or from what vantage
point the reader views the subject. A consistent point of view is essential
to clarity; if you inappropriately switch from the first person to the
third person in midsentence, you are certain to confuse your reader.
Precise word choicecontributes to clarity and helps eliminate ambi-
guity and awkwardness. Vague words, clichés, poor use of idiom, and
inappropriate usage detract from clarity. That conciseness is a require-
ment of clearly written communication should be evident to anyone who
has ever attempted to decipher an insurance policy or a legal contract.
For the sake of clarity, remove unnecessary words from your writing.
clauses
A clause is a group of words that contains a subject and a predicate and
that functions as a sentence or as part of a sentence. (See sentence con-
struction.) Every subject-predicate word group in a sentence is a clause,
and every sentence must contain at least one independent clause; other-
wise, it is a sentence fragment.
A clause that could stand alone as a simple sentence is an indepen-
dent clause. (“The scaffolding fellwhen the rope broke.”) A clause that
could not stand alone if the rest of the sentence were deleted is a depen-
dent(or subordinate) clause.(“I was at the St. Louis branch when the de-
cision was made.”)
Dependent clauses are useful in making the relationship between
thoughts clearer and more succinct than if the ideas were presented in a
series of simple sentences or compound sentences.
FRAGMENTED The recycling facility is located between
Millville and Darrtown. Both villages use it.
[The two thoughts are of approximately equal
importance.]
SUBORDINATED The recycling facility, which is located between
Millville and Darrtown, is used by both villages.
[One thought is subordinated to the other.]
Subordinate clauses are especially effective for expressing thoughts that
describe or explain another statement. Too much subordination, how-
ever, can be confusing and foster wordiness. See also conciseness.
were
(cid:2) He selected instructors whose classes had a slant that wasspecifi-
at engineering students. ^
cally directed toward students who intended to go into engineering.
^

=== Page 104 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:48 AM Page 71
coherence 71
A clause can be connected with the rest of its sentence by a coordinat-
ing conjunction, a subordinating conjunction, a relative pronoun, or a
conjunctive adverb. C
(cid:2) It was 500 miles to the facility, sowe made arrangements to fly.
[coordinating conjunction]
(cid:2) Mission control will need to be alert becauseat launch the space
shuttle could be damaged by flying debris.
[subordinating conjunction]
(cid:2) Robert M. Fano was the scientist whodeveloped the earliest
multiple-access computer system at MIT. [relative pronoun]
(cid:2) We arrived in the evening; nevertheless, we began the tour of the
facility. [conjunctive adverb]
clichés
Clichés are expressions that have been used for so long that they are no
longer fresh but come to mind easily because they are so familiar.
Clichés are often wordy as well as vague and can be confusing, espe-
cially to speakers of English as a second language. A better, more direct
word or phrase is given for each of the following clichés.
INSTEAD OF USE
all over the map scattered,unfocused
the game plan strategy,schedule
lastbutnotleast last,finally
Some writers use clichés in a misguided attempt to appear casual or
spontaneous, just as other writers try to impress readers with buzz-
words. Although clichés may come to mind easily while you are writing
a draft, eliminate them during revision. See also affectation, concise-
ness, and international correspondence.
coherence
Writing is coherent when the relationships among ideas are clear to
readers. The major components of coherent writing are a logical se-
quence of related ideas and clear transitions between these ideas. See
also clarityand organization.
Presenting ideas in a logical sequence is the most important require-
ment in achieving coherence. The key to achieving a logical sequence is

=== Page 105 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:48 AM Page 72
72 collaborative writing
the use of a good outline. (See outlining.) An outline forces you to es-
tablish a beginning, a middle, and an end. That structure contributes
C greatly to coherence by enabling you to experiment with sequences and
lay out the most direct route to your purposewithout digressing.
Thoughtful transitionis also essential; without it, your writing can-
not achieve the smooth flow of sentence to sentence and paragraph to
paragraph that results in coherence.
Check your draft carefully for coherence during revision. If pos-
sible, have someone else review your draft for how well it expresses the
relationships between ideas. Such help is especially important in collab-
orative writing where team-member contributions need to be blended
into a coherent document. See also unity.
collaborative writing
Collaborative writing occurs when two or more writers work together
to produce a single document for which they share responsibility and
decision-making authority, as is often the case with proposals. Collabo-
rative writing teams are formed when (1) the size of a project or the
time constraints imposed on it require collaboration, (2) the project in-
volves multiple areas of expertise, or (3) the project requires the meld-
ing of divergent views into a single perspective that is acceptable to
the whole team or to another group. Many types of collaborations are
possible, from the collaboration of a primary writer with a variety of
contributors and reviewers to a highly interactive collaboration in
DIGITAL TIP
Wikis for Collaborative Documents
Wikis are Web sites in which the content and organization can be
quickly and easily edited by authorized users.Wikis allow collabora-
tors in different geographic locations to coauthor documents by
providing them with basic editing functions and the ability to post
comments or questions.A writer may posta documentdraftto a wiki
for collaborators to edit the draft. The edits are tracked so that all
users can see who revised what and when, thus reducing problems
with tracking multiple versions.Wikis can be used also for sharing and
distributing information,managing projects,and providing commu-
nication spaces for clients and customers. For more detailed infor-
mation on wikis, go to bedfordstmartins.com/alredtech and select
Digital Tips,“Wikis for Collaborative Documents.”

=== Page 106 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:48 AM Page 73
collaborative writing 73
which everyone on a team plays a relatively equal role in shaping the
document.*
C
Tasks of the Collaborative Writing Team
The collaborating team strives to achieve a compatible working rela-
tionship by dividing the work in a way that uses each writer’s expertise
and experience to its advantage. The team should also designate a coor-
dinator who will guide the team members’ activities, organize the proj-
ect, and ensure coherence and consistency within the document. The
coordinator’s duties can be determined by mutual agreement or, if the
team often works together, assigned on a rotating basis.
Planning. The team conceptualizes the document to be produced as
the members collectively identify the audience, purpose, context, and
scope of the project. See also meetings and “Five Steps to Successful
Writing” (page xv).
At this stage, the team establishes a project plan that may include
guidelines for communication among team members, version control
(naming, dating, and managing document drafts), review procedures,
and writing style standards that team members are expected to follow.
The plan includes a schedule with due dates for completing initial re-
search tasks, outlines, drafts, reviews, revisions, and the final document.
Milestone deadlines must be met, even if the drafts are not as polished
as the individual writers would like: One missed deadline can delay the
entire project.
Research and Writing. At this stage, the team completes initial re-
search tasks, elicits reports from team members, creates a broad outline
of the document (see outlining), and assigns writing tasks to individual
team members, based on their expertise and the outline. Depending on
the project, each team member further researches an assigned segment
of the document, expands and develops the broad outline, and pro-
duces a draft from a detailed outline. See also research and writing a
draft.
Reviewing. Keeping the audience’s needs and the document’s purpose
in mind, each team member critically yet diplomatically reviews the
other team members’ drafts, from the overall organizationto the clarity
of each paragraph, and offers advice to help improve the writer’s work.
*For a discussion of various forms of collaboration, see Paul Benjamin Lowry, Aaron
Curtis, and Michelle René Lowry, “Building a Taxonomy and Nomenclature of Col-
laborative Writing to Improve Interdisciplinary Research and Practice,” Journal of
Business Communication41.1 (January 2004): 66–99.

=== Page 107 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:48 AM Page 74
74 collaborative writing
Team members can easily solicit feedback by sharing electronic files.
Tracking and commenting features allow the reviewer to show the sug-
C gested changes without deleting the original text.
DIGITAL TIP
Reviewing Collaborative Documents
Some Adobe Acrobat® applications and many word-processing pack-
ages have options for providing feedback on and tracking changes in
the drafts of collaborators’documents.You can add textor voice anno-
tations within the text, allowing collaborators to read or hear your
comments and edits and to accept or reject each suggested change.
For more on this topic,see bedfordstmartins.com/alredtechand select
Digital Tips,“Reviewing Collaborative Documents.”
Revising. In this stage, individual writers evaluate their colleagues’ re-
views and accept, reject, or build on their suggestions. Then, the team
coordinator can consolidate all drafts into a final master copy and main-
tain and evaluate it for consistency and coherence. See also revision.
Conflict
As you collaborate, be ready to tolerate some disharmony, but temper it
with mutual respect. Team members may not agree on every subject,
and differing perspectives can easily lead to conflict, ranging from mild
differences over minor points to major showdowns. However, creative
differences resolved respectfully can energize the team and, in fact,
strengthen a finished document by compelling writers to reexamine as-
sumptions and issues in unanticipated ways. See also listening.
WRITER’S CHECKLIST Writing Collaboratively
(cid:3)
Designate one person as the team coordinator.
(cid:3)
Identify the audience,purpose,context,and scope of the project.
(cid:3)
Create a projectplan,including a schedule and standards.
(cid:3)
Create a working outline of the document.
(cid:3)
Assign segments or tasks to each team member.
(cid:3)
Research and write drafts of documentsegments.
(cid:3)
Follow the schedule:due dates for drafts,revisions,and final versions.
(cid:3)
Use the agreed-upon standards for style and format.
(cid:3)
Exchange segments for team member reviews.

=== Page 108 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:48 AM Page 75
colons 75
Writer’s Checklist:Writing Collaboratively (continued)
(cid:3)
Revise segments as needed.
C
(cid:3)
Meetthe established deadlines.
colons
The colon (:) is a mark of introduction that alerts readers to the close
connection between the preceding statement and what follows.
Colons in Sentences
A colon links independent clauses to words, phrases, clauses, or lists
that identify, rename, explain, emphasize, amplify, or illustrate the sen-
tence that precedes the colon.
(cid:2) Two topics will be discussed: the new lab design and the revised
safety procedures. [phrases that identify]
(cid:2) Only one thing will satisfy Mr. Sturgess: our finished report.
[appositive (renaming) phrase for emphasis]
(cid:2) Any organization is confronted with two separate, though related,
information problems: It must maintain an effective internal com-
munication system and an effective external communication
system. [clause to amplify and explain]
(cid:2) Heart patients should make key lifestyle changes: stop smoking,
exercise regularly, eat a low-fat diet, and reduce stress.
[list to identify and illustrate]
Colons with Salutations,Titles,Citations,
and Numbers
A colon follows the salutation in business letters, even when the saluta-
tion refers to a person by first name.
(cid:2) Dear Professor Jeffers: orDear Georgia:
Colons separate titles from subtitles and separate references to sections
of works in citations. See also documenting sources.
(cid:2) Writing That Works: Communicating Effectively on the Job
(cid:2) Genesis 10:16 [chapter 10, verse 16]

=== Page 109 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:48 AM Page 76
76 colons
Colons separate numbers in time references and indicate numerical
ratios.
C
(cid:2) 9:30 a.m. [9 hours and 30 minutes]
(cid:2) The cement is mixed with water and sand at 5:3:1.
[The colon is read as the word to.]
Punctuation and Capitalization with Colons
A colon always goes outside quotation marks.
(cid:2) This was the real meaning of the manager’s “suggestion”: Cooper-
ation within our department must improve.
As this example shows, the first word after a colon may be capitalized if
the statement following the colon is a complete sentence and functions
as a formal statement or question. If the element following the colon is
subordinate, however, use a lowercase letter to begin that element. See
also capitalization.
(cid:2) We have only one way to stay within our present budget: to reduce
expenditures for research and development.
Unnecessary Colons
Do not place a colon between a verband its objects.
(cid:2) Three fluids that clean pipettes are/: water, alcohol, and acetone.
Likewise, do not use a colon between a prepositionand its object.
(cid:2) I may be transferred to/: Tucson, Boston, or Miami.
Do not insert a colon after including, such as, or for example to intro-
duce a simple list.
(cid:2) Office computers should not be used for activities such as/:
personal e-mail, Web surfing, Internet shopping, and playing com-
puter games.
One common exception is made when a verb or preposition is followed
by a stacked list; however, it may be possible to introduce the list with a
complete sentence instead.
:
The following corporations
(cid:2) Corporations thatmanufacture computersinclude:
^ ^
Apple Compaq Dell
Gateway IBM Sony

=== Page 110 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:48 AM Page 77
commas 77
comma splice
C
A comma splice is a grammatical error in which two independent
clausesare joined by only a comma.
INCORRECT It was 500 miles to the facility, we arranged to fly.
A comma splice can be corrected in several ways.
1. Substitute a semicolon, a semicolon and a conjunctive adverb, or a
comma and a coordinating conjunction.
(cid:2) It was 500 miles to the facility;we arranged to fly.
(cid:2) It was 500 miles to the facility; therefore, we arranged to fly.
(cid:2) It was 500 miles to the facility, sowe arranged to fly.
2. Create two sentences.
(cid:2) It was 500 miles to the facility. We arranged to fly.
3. Subordinate one clause to the other. (See subordination.)
(cid:2) Because it was 500 miles to the facility, we arranged to fly.
See also sentence constructionand sentence faults.
commas
DIRECTORY
Linking IndependentClauses 78 Showing Omissions 81
Enclosing Elements 78 Using with Numbers and Names 81
Introducing Elements 79 Using with Other Punctuation 82
Separating Items in a Series 80 Avoiding Unnecessary Commas 83
Clarifying and Contrasting 81
Like all punctuation, the comma (,) helps readers understand the
writer’s meaning and prevents ambiguity. Notice how the comma helps
make the meaning clear in the second example.
AMBIGUOUS To be successful nurses with M.S. degrees must
continue to learn.
CLEAR To be successful, nurses with M.S. degrees must
continue to learn.
[The comma makes clear where the main part of the
sentence begins.]

=== Page 111 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:48 AM Page 78
78 commas
Do not follow the old myth that you should insert a comma wher-
ever you would pause if you were speaking. Although you would pause
C wherever you encounter a comma, you should not insert a comma
wherever you might pause. Effective use of commas depends on an un-
derstanding of sentence construction.
Linking IndependentClauses
Use a comma before a coordinating conjunction(and, but, or, nor, and
sometimes so, yet, and for) that links independent clauses.
(cid:2) The new microwave disinfection system was delivered, butthe in-
stallation will require an additional week.
However, if two independent clauses are short and closely related—and
there is no danger of confusing the reader—the comma may be omit-
ted. Both of the following examples are correct.
(cid:2) The cable snapped and the power failed.
(cid:2) The cable snapped, and the power failed.
Enclosing Elements
Commas are used to enclose nonessential information in nonrestrictive
clauses, phrases, and parenthetical elements. See also restrictive and
nonrestrictive elements.
(cid:2) Our new factory, which began operations last month, should add
25 percent to total output. [nonrestrictive clause]
(cid:2) The technician, working quickly and efficiently, finished early.
[nonrestrictive phrase]
(cid:2) We can, of course, expect their lawyer to call us.
[parenthetical element]
Yesand noare set off by commas in such uses as the following:
(cid:2) I agree with you, yes.
(cid:2) No, I do not think we can finish by the deadline.
A directaddressshould be enclosed in commas.
(cid:2) You will note, Jeff, that the surface of the brake shoe complies
with the specification.
An appositivephrase (which re-identifies another expression in the sen-
tence) is enclosed in commas.

=== Page 112 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:48 AM Page 79
commas 79
(cid:2) Our company, Envirex Medical Systems, won several awards last
year.
C
Interrupting parenthetical and transitional words or phrases are usually
set off with commas. See also transition.
(cid:2) The report, therefore, needs to be revised.
Commas are omitted when the word or phrase does not interrupt the
continuity of thought.
(cid:2) I thereforesuggest that we begin construction.
For other means of punctuating parenthetical elements, see dashes and
parentheses.
Introducing Elements
Clauses and Phrases. Generally, place a comma after an introductory
clause or phrase, especially if it is long, to identify where the introduc-
tory element ends and the main part of the sentence begins.
(cid:2) Because we have not yet contained the new strain of influenza, we
recommend vaccination for high-risk patients.
A long modifying phrase that precedes the main clause should always
be followed by a comma.
(cid:2) During the first series of field-performance tests at our Colorado
proving ground, the new engine failed to meet our expectations.
When an introductory phrase is short and closely related to the main
clause, the comma may be omitted.
(cid:2) In two secondsa 5°C temperature rise occurs in the test tube.
A comma should always follow an absolute phrase, which modifies the
whole sentence.
(cid:2) The tests completed, we organized the data for the final report.
Words and Quotations. Certain types of introductory words are fol-
lowed by a comma. One example is a transitional word or phrase (how-
ever, in addition) that connects the preceding clause or sentence with
the thought that follows.
(cid:2) Furthermore, steel can withstand a humidity of 99 percent, pro-
vided that there is no chloride or sulfur dioxide in the atmosphere.
(cid:2) For example, this change will make us more competitive in the
global marketplace.

=== Page 113 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:48 AM Page 80
80 commas
When an adverb closely modifies the verb or the entire sentence, it
should not be followed by a comma.
C
(cid:2) Perhapswe can still solve the turnover problem. Certainlywe
should try.
[Perhapsand certainlyclosely modify each statement.]
A proper noun used in an introductory direct address is followed by a
comma, as is an interjection(such as oh, well, why, indeed, yes, and no).
(cid:2) Nancy, enclosed is the article you asked me to review.
[direct address]
(cid:2) Indeed, I will ensure that your request is forwarded. [interjection]
Use a comma to separate a direct quotationfrom its introduction.
(cid:2) Morton and Lucia White said, “People live in cities but dream of
the countryside.”
Do not use a comma when giving an indirect quotation.
(cid:2) Morton and Lucia White said thatpeople dream of the country-
side, even though they live in cities.
Separating Items in a Series
Although the comma before the last item in a series is sometimes omit-
ted, it is generally clearer to include it.
(cid:2) Random House, Bantam, Doubleday, and Dell were individual
publishing companies.
[Without the final comma, “Doubleday and Dell” might refer to
one company or two.]
Phrases and clauses in coordinate series are also punctuated with
commas.
(cid:2) Plants absorb noxious gases, act as receptors of dirt particles, and
cleanse the air of other impurities.
When phrases or clauses in a series contain commas, use semicolons
rather than commas to separate the items.
(cid:2) Our new products include amitriptyline, which has sold very well;
and cholestyramine, which was just introduced.
When adjectives modifying the same noun can be reversed and make
sense, or when they can be separated by andor or, they should be sepa-
rated by commas.
(cid:2) The aircraft featured a modern, sleek,swept-wingdesign.

=== Page 114 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:48 AM Page 81
commas 81
When an adjective modifies a phrase, no comma is required.
(cid:2) She was investigating the damaged inventory-control system.
C
[The adjective damagedmodifies the phrase inventory-control
system.]
Never separate a final adjective from its noun.
(cid:2) He is a conscientious, honest, reliable/, worker.
Clarifying and Contrasting
Use a comma to separate two contrasting thoughts or ideas.
(cid:2) The project was finished on time, but not within the budget.
Use a comma after an independent clause that is only loosely related to
the dependent clause that follows it or that could be misread without
the comma.
(cid:2) I should be able to finish the plan by July, even though I lost time
because of illness.
Showing Omissions
A comma sometimes replaces a verb in certain elliptical constructions.
(cid:2) Some were punctual; others,late. [The comma replaces were.]
It is better, however, to avoid such constructions in technical writing.
Using with Numbers and Names
Commas are conventionally used to separate distinct items. Use com-
mas between the elements of an address written on the same line (but
not between the state and the ZIP Code).
(cid:2) Kristen James, 4119 Mill Road, Dayton, Ohio 45401
A full date that is written in month-day-year format uses a comma pre-
ceding and following the year.
(cid:2) November 30, 2020, is the payoff date.
Do not use commas for dates in the day-month-year format, which is
used in many parts of the world and by the U.S. military. See also inter-
national correspondence.
(cid:2) Note that 30 November 2020 is the payoff date.

=== Page 115 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:48 AM Page 82
82 commas
No commas are used when showing only the month and year or month
and day in a date.
C
(cid:2) The target date of May 2012 is optimistic, so I would like to meet
on March 4 to discuss our options.
Use commas to separate the elements of Arabic numbers.
(cid:2) 1,528,200 feet
However, because many countries use the comma as the decimal
marker, use spaces or periods rather than commas in international doc-
uments.
(cid:2) 1.528.200 meters or1 528 200 meters
A comma may be substituted for the colon in the salutation of a per-
sonal letter or e-mail. Do not, however, use a comma in the salutation
of a business letter or e-mail, even if you use the person’s first name.
(cid:2) Dear Marie, [personal letter or e-mail]
(cid:2) Dear Marie: [business letter or e-mail]
Use commas to separate the elements of geographical names.
(cid:2) Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Use a comma to separate names that are reversed (Smith, Alvin) and
commas with professional abbreviations.
(cid:2) Jim Rogers Jr., M.D., chaired the conference.
[Jr.or Sr.does not require a comma.]
Using with Other Punctuation
Conjunctive adverbs (however, nevertheless, consequently, for example,
on the other hand) that join independent clauses are preceded by a
semicolon and followed by a comma. Such adverbs function both as
modifiersand as connectives.
(cid:2) The idea is good; however, our budget is not sufficient.
As shown earlier in this entry, use semicolons rather than commas to
separate items in a series when the items themselves contain commas.
When a comma should follow a phrase or clause that ends with
words in parentheses, the comma always appears outside the closing
parenthesis.
(cid:2) Although we left late (at 7:30 p.m.), we arrived in time for the
keynote address.

=== Page 116 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:48 AM Page 83
commas 83
Commas always go inside quotation marks.
(cid:2) The operator placed the discharge bypass switch at “normal,”
C
which triggered a second discharge.
Except with abbreviations, a comma should not be used with a dash, an
exclamation mark, a period, or a question mark.
(cid:2) “Have you finished the project?/, ” she asked.
Avoiding Unnecessary Commas
A number of common writing errors involve placing commas where
they do not belong. As stated earlier, such errors often occur because
writers assume that a pause in a sentence should be indicated by a
comma.
Do not place a comma between a subject and verb or between a
verb and its object.
(cid:2) The conditions at the test site in the Arctic/, made accurate read-
ings difficult.
(cid:2) She has often said/, that one company’s failure is another’s
opportunity.
Do not use a comma between the elements of a compound subject or
compound predicate consisting of only two elements.
(cid:2) The director of the design department/, and the supervisor of the
quality-control section were opposed to the new schedules.
(cid:2) The design director listed five major objections/, and asked that the
new schedule be reconsidered.
Do not include a comma after a coordinating conjunction such as and
or but.
(cid:2) The chairperson formally adjourned the meeting, but/, the
members of the committee continued to argue.
Do not place a comma before the first item or after the last item of a
series.
(cid:2) The new products we are considering include/, calculators, scan-
ners, and cameras.
(cid:2) It was a fast, simple, inexpensive/, process.
Do not use a comma to separate a prepositional phrase from the rest of
the sentence unnecessarily.
(cid:2) We discussed the final report/, on the new project.

=== Page 117 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:48 AM Page 84
84 compare / contrast
compare / contrast
C
When you compare things, you point out similarities or both similari-
ties and differences. (“He compared the two brands before making his
choice.”) When you contrastthings, you point out only the differences.
(“Their speaking styles contrastedsharply.”) In either case, you compare
or contrast only things that are part of a common category.
When compare is used to establish a general similarity, it is fol-
lowed by to. (“He compared our receiving the grant to winning a
marathon.”) When compare is used to indicate a close examination of
similarities or differences, it is followed by with. (“We comparedthe fea-
tures of the new copier withthose of the current one.”)
Contrast is normally followed by with. (“The new policy contrasts
sharply withthe earlier one.”) When the nounform of contrastis used,
one speaks of the contrast between two things or of one thing being in
contrast tothe other.
(cid:2) There is a sharp contrast betweenthe old and new policies.
(cid:2) The new policy is insharp contrast tothe earlier one.
comparison
When you are making a comparison, be sure that both or all of the ele-
ments being compared are clearly evident to your reader.
than the Nicom 2 software
(cid:2) The Nicom 3 software is better.
^
The things being compared must be of the same kind.
a briefcase
(cid:2) A hard-side briefcase offers more protection than fabric.
^ ^
Be sure to point out the parallels or differences between the things being
compared. Do not assume your reader will know what you mean.
it is from
(cid:2) Washington is farther from Boston than Philadelphia.
^
A double comparison in the same sentence requires that the first com-
parison be completed before the second one is stated.
(cid:2) The discovery of electricity was one of the great if not the greatest
, if not the greatest
scientific discoveries in history.
^

=== Page 118 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:48 AM Page 85
comparison method of development 85
Do not attempt to compare things that are not comparable.
(cid:2) Agricultural experts advise that storage space is reduced by C
requires 40 percent less storage space than loose hay requires
40 percent compared withbaled hay.
^
[Storage spaceis not comparable to baled hay.]
comparison method of development
As a method of development, comparison points out similarities and
differences between the elements of your subject. The comparison
method of development can help readers in an audience understand a
difficult or an unfamiliar subject by relating it to a simpler or more fa-
miliar one.
You must first determine the basis for the comparison. For ex-
ample, if you were comparing bids from contractors for a remodeling
project at your company, you most likely would compare such factors
as price, previous experience, personnel qualifications, availability at a
time convenient for you, and completion date. Once you have deter-
mined the basis or bases for comparison, you can determine the most
effective way to structure your comparison: whole by whole or part by
part.
In the whole-by-whole method, all the relevant characteristics of
one item are examined before all the relevant characteristics of the next
item. The description of typical woodworking glues in Figure C–3 is or-
ganized according to the whole-by-whole method. It describes each type
of glue and all its characteristics before moving to the next one. This
description would be useful for those readers who wish to learn about
all types of wood glues.
If your purpose is to help readers consider the various character-
istics of all the glues, the information might be arranged according to
the part-by-part method of comparison, in which the relevant features
of the items are compared one by one (as shown in Figure C–4). The
part-by-part method could accommodate further comparison—such
as temperature ranges, special warnings, and common use, in this
case.
Comparisons can also be made effectively with the use of tables, as
shown in Figure C–5. The advantage of a table is that it provides a
quick reference, allowing readers to see and compare all the informa-
tion at once. The disadvantage is that a table cannot convey as much re-
lated detailed information as a narrative description.

=== Page 119 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:48 AM Page 86
86 comparison method of development
White glueis the most useful all-purpose adhesive for light con-
C
struction, but it cannot be used on projects that will be exposed
to moisture, high temperature, or great stress. Wood that is being
joined with white glue must remain in a clamp until the glue dries,
which takes about 30 minutes.
Aliphatic resin gluehas a stronger and more moisture-
resistant bond than white glue. It must be used at temperatures
above 50°F. The wood should be clamped for about 30 minutes....
Plastic resin glueis the strongest of the common wood adhe-
sives. It is highly moisture resistant, though not completely
waterproof. Sold in powdered form, this glue must be mixed with
water and used at temperatures above 70°F. It is slow setting, and
the joint should be clamped for four to six hours....
Contact cementis a very strong adhesive that bonds so
quickly it must be used with great care. It is ideal for mounting
sheets of plastic laminate on wood. It is also useful for attaching
strips of veneer to the edges of plywood. Because this adhesive
bonds immediately when two pieces are pressed together, clamping
is not necessary, but the parts to be joined must be carefully aligned
before being placed together. Most brands are flammable, and the
fumes can be harmful if inhaled. To meet current safety standards,
this type of glue must be used in a well-ventilated area, away from
flames or heat.
FIGURE C–3. Whole-by-Whole Method of Comparison
Woodworking adhesives are rated primarily according to their
bonding strength, moisture resistance, and setting time.
Bonding strengthis categorized as very strong, moderately
strong, or adequate for use with little stress. Contact cement and
plastic resin glue bond very strongly, while aliphatic resin glue
bonds moderately strongly. White glue provides a bond least resis-
tant to stress.
The moisture resistanceof woodworking glues is rated as high,
moderate, or low.Plastic resin glue and contact cement are highly
moisture resistant, aliphatic resin glue is moderately moisture resis-
tant, and white glue is least moisture resistant.
Setting timefor the glues varies from an immediate bond to a
four-to-six-hour bond. Contact cement bonds immediately and re-
quires no clamping. Because the bond is immediate, surfaces being
joined must be carefully aligned before being placed together.
White glue and aliphatic resin glue set in 30 minutes; both require
clamping to secure the bond. Plastic resin, the strongest wood glue,
sets in four to six hours and also requires clamping.
FIGURE C–4. Part-by-PartMethod of Comparison

=== Page 120 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:48 AM Page 87
complaintletters 87
Aliphatic Plastic Contact
White Glue Resin Glue Resin Glue Cement
Bonding C
Low Moderate High High
Strength
Moisture
Low Moderate High High
Resistance
Thirty minutes Thirty minutes Four to Bonds on
Setting Time
six hours contact
Light General General Laminate
Common Uses construction purpose purpose and veneer
to wood
FIGUREC–5. Comparison Using a Table to Illustrate Key Differences
complaint letters
A complaint letter (or e-mail) describes a problem that the writer re-
quests the recipient to solve. The toneof a complaint letter or e-mail is
important; the most effective ones do not sound complaining. If your
message reflects only your annoyance and anger, you may not be taken
seriously. Assume that the recipient will be conscientious in correcting
the problem. However, anticipate reader reactions or rebuttals. See
audience.
(cid:2) I reviewed my user manual’s “safe operating guidelines” carefully
before I installed the device.
[This assures readers you followed instructions.]
Without such explanations, readers may be tempted to dismiss your
complaint. Figure C–6 shows a complaint letter that details a billing
problem. Although the circumstances and severity of the problem may
vary, effective complaint letters generally follow this pattern:
1. Identify the problem or faulty item(s) and include relevant invoice
numbers, part names, and dates. Include a copy of the receipt, bill,
or contract, and keep the original for your records.
2. Explain logically, clearly, and specifically what went wrong, espe-
cially for a problem with a service. (Avoid guessing why you think
some problem occurred.)
3. State what you expect the reader to do to solve the problem.
Begin by checking to see if the company’s Web site provides instruc-
tions for submitting a complaint. Otherwise, for large organizations,
you may address your complaint to Customer Service. In smaller organi-
zations, you might write to a vice president in charge of sales or service,
or directly to the owner. As a last resort, you may find that sending

=== Page 121 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:48 AM Page 88
88 complement/ compliment
Subject: ST3 Diagnostic Scanners
C
On July 10, I ordered nine ST3 Diagnostic Scanners (order
# ST3-1179R). The scanners were ordered from your customer
Web site.
On August 3, I received seven HL monitors from your parts
warehouse in Newark, New Jersey. I immediately returned those
monitors with a note indicating that a mistake had been made.
However, not only have I failed to receive the ST3 scanners that
I ordered, but I have also been billed repeatedly for the seven
monitors.
I have enclosed a copy of my confirmation e-mail, the shipping
form, and the most recent bill. If you cannot send me the scanners
I ordered by November 2, please cancel my order.
Sincerely,
FIGURE C–6. ComplaintLetter
copies of a complaint letter to more than one person in the company will
get faster results. See also adjustmentlettersand refusal letters.
complement / compliment
Complementmeans “anything that completes a whole” (see also comple-
ments). It is used as either a nounor a verb.
(cid:2) A complementof four employees would bring our staff up to its
normal level. [noun]
(cid:2) The two programs complementone another perfectly. [verb]
Complimentmeans “praise.” It too is used as either a noun or a verb.
(cid:2) The manager’s complimentboosted staff morale. [noun]
(cid:2) The manager complimentedthe staff on its efficient job. [verb]
complements
A complement is a word, phrase, or clause used in the predicate of a
sentence to complete the meaning of the sentence.

=== Page 122 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:48 AM Page 89
compose / constitute/ comprise 89
(cid:2) Pilots fly airplanes. [word]
(cid:2) To live is to risk death. [phrase]
C
(cid:2) John knew that he would be late. [clause]
Four kinds of complements are generally recognized: direct object, indi-
rect object, objective complement, and subjective complement. See also
sentence construction.
A direct objectis a nounor noun equivalent that receives the action
of a transitive verb; it answers the question What? or Whom? after the
verb.
(cid:2) I designed a Web site. [noun phrase]
(cid:2) I like to work. [verbal]
(cid:2) I like it. [pronoun]
(cid:2) I like what I saw. [noun clause]
An indirect object is a noun or noun equivalent that occurs with a di-
rect object after certain kinds of transitive verbs such as give, wish,
cause, and tell. It answers the question To whom or what? or For
whom or what?
(cid:2) We should buy the officea scanner.
[Scanneris the direct object, and officeis the indirect object.]
An objective complement completes the meaning of a sentence by re-
vealing something about the object of its transitive verb. An objective
complement may be either a noun or an adjective.
(cid:2) They call him agenius. [noun phrase]
(cid:2) We painted the building white. [adjective]
A subjective complement, which follows a linking verb rather than a
transitive verb, describes the subject. A subjective complement may be
either a noun or an adjective.
(cid:2) His sister is a consultant. [noun phrase follows linking verb is]
(cid:2) His brother is ill. [adjective follows linking verb is]
compose / constitute / comprise
Compose and constitute both mean “make up the whole.” The parts
compose or constitute the whole. (“The nine offices compose the divi-
sion. Unethical activities constitute cause for dismissal.”) Comprise

=== Page 123 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:48 AM Page 90
90 compound words
means “include,” “contain,” or “consist of.” The whole comprises the
parts. (“The division comprisesnine offices.”)
C
compound words
A compound word is made from two or more words that function as a
single concept. A compound may be hyphenated, written as one word,
or written as separate words.
(cid:2) high-energy nevertheless postoffice
low-level online Web site
If you are not certain whether a compound word should use a hyphen,
check a dictionary.
Be careful to distinguish between compound words (greenhouse)
and words that simply appear together but do not constitute compound
words (green house). For plurals of compound words, generally add s
to the last letter (bookcases and Web sites). However, when the first
word of the compound is more important to its meaning than the last,
the first word takes the s (editors in chief). Possessives are formed by
adding ’s to the end of the compound word (the editor in chief’s desk,
the pipeline’sdiameter, the post office’shours). See also possessive case.
conciseness
Conciseness means that extraneous words, phrases, clauses, and sen-
tences have been removed from writing without sacrificing clarityor ap-
propriate detail. Conciseness is not a synonym for brevity; a long report
may be concise, while its abstractmay be brief and concise. Conciseness
is always desirable, but brevity may or may not be desirable in a given
passage, depending on the writer’s purpose. Although concise sentences
are not guaranteed to be effective, wordy sentences always sacrifice
some of their readability and coherence.
Causes of Wordiness
Modifiersthat repeat an idea implicit or present in the word being mod-
ified contribute to wordiness by being redundant. See also reason is
[because].
basicessentials completelyfinished
finaloutcome presentstatus

=== Page 124 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:48 AM Page 91
conciseness 91
Coordinated synonyms that merely repeat each other contribute to
wordiness.
C
each and every basic and fundamental
finally and for good firstand foremost
Excess qualification also contributes to wordiness.
perfectlyclear completelyaccurate
Expletives, relative pronouns, and relative adjectives, although they
have legitimate purposes, often result in wordiness.
WORDY There are[expletive] many Web designers who[relative
pronoun] are planning to attend the conference, which
[relative pronoun] is scheduled for May 13–15.
CONCISE Many Web designers plan to attend the conference
scheduled for May 13–15.
Circumlocution (a long, indirect way of expressing things) is a leading
cause of wordiness. See also gobbledygook.
WORDY The payment to which a subcontractor is entitled should
be made promptly so that in the event of a subsequent
contractual dispute we, as general contractors, may
not be held in default of our contract by virtue of non-
payment.
CONCISE Pay subcontractors promptly. Then, if a contractual dis-
pute occurs, we cannot be held in default of our contract
because of nonpayment.
When conciseness is overdone, writing can become choppy and am-
biguous. (See also telegraphic style.) Too much conciseness can produce
a style that is not only too brief but also too blunt, especially in corre-
spondence.
WRITER’S CHECKLIST Achieving Conciseness
Wordiness is understandable when you are writing a draft,butitshould
notsurvive revision.
(cid:3)
Use subordinationto achieve conciseness.
.
five-page
•The financial reportwas carefully documented,and itcovered
^ ^
five pages.

=== Page 125 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:48 AM Page 92
92 conciseness
Writer’s Checklist:Achieving Conciseness (continued)
(cid:3)
Avoid affectationby using simple words and phrases.
C
WORDY Itis the policy of the company to provide Internetaccess to
enable employees to conductthe online communication
necessary to discharge their responsibilities;such should
notbe utilized for personal communications or nonbusi-
ness activities.
CONCISE Employee Internetaccess should be used only for appropri-
ate company business.
(cid:3)
Eliminate redundancy.
WORDY Postinstallation testing,which is offered to all our cus-
tomers atno further costto them whatsoever,is available
with each Line Scan System One purchased from this
company.
CONCISE Free postinstallation testing is offered with each Line Scan
System One.
(cid:3)
Change the passive voiceto the active voice and the indicative mood
to the imperative mood whenever possible.
WORDY Bar codes normally are used when an order is intended to
be displayed on a computer,and inventory numbers nor-
mally are used when an order is to be placed with the
manufacturer.
CONCISE Use bar codes to display the order on a computer,and
use inventory numbers to place the order with the man-
ufacturer.
(cid:3)
Eliminate or replace wordy introductory phrases or pretentious words
and phrases (in the case of,itmay be said that,itappears that,need-
less to say).
REPLACE WITH
in order to,with a view to to
due to the factthat,for the reason that,
owing to the factthat,the reason for because
by means of,by using,in connection with,
through the use of by,with
atthis time,atthis pointin time,atpresent,
atthe present now,currently
(cid:3)
Do notoveruse intensifiers,such as very,more,most,best,quite,great,
really,and especially.Instead provide specific and useful details.
Use the search-and-replace command to find and revise wordy expres-
sions,including to beand unnecessary helping verbssuch as will.

=== Page 126 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:48 AM Page 93
conclusions 93
conclusions
C
The conclusion of a document ties the main ideas together and can
clinch a final significant point. This final point may, for example, make
a prediction or a judgment, summarize the key findings of a study, or
recommend a course of action. Figure C–7 is a conclusion from a pro-
posal to reduce health-care costs by increasing employee fitness through
health-club subsidies. Notice that it makes a recommendation, summa-
rizes key points, and points out several benefits of implementing the
recommendation.
Conclusion and Recommendation
Makes a I recommend that ABO, Inc., participate in the corporate
recommen- membership program at AeroFitness Clubs, Inc., by subsidiz-
dation ing employee memberships. Offering this benefit to employees
will demonstrate ABO’s commitment to the importance of a
healthy workforce. Club membership allows employees at all
five ABO warehouses to participate in the program. The more
employees who participate, the greater the long-term savings
in ABO’s health-care costs.
Enrolling employees in the corporate program at AeroFitness
would allow them to receive a one-month, free trial member-
ship. Those interested in continuing could then join the club
and pay half of the one-time membership fee of $900 and re-
Summarizes
ceive a 30 percent discount on the $600 yearly fee. The other
key points
half of the membership fee ($450) would be paid for by ABO.
If employees leave the company, they would have the option
of purchasing ABO’s share of the membership to continue at
AeroFitness or selling their half of the membership to another
ABO employee wishing to join AeroFitness.
Implementing this program will help ABO, Inc., reduce its
Points to health-care costs while building stronger employee relations
benefits by offering employees a desirable benefit. If this proposal is
adopted, I have some additional thoughts about publicizing the
program to encourage employee participation that I would be
pleased to share.
FIGUREC–7. Conclusion

=== Page 127 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:48 AM Page 94
94 conclusions
The way you conclude depends on your purpose, the needs of your
audience, and the context. For example, a lengthy sales proposal might
C conclude persuasively with a summary of the proposal’s salient points
and the company’s relevant strengths. The following examples are typi-
cal concluding strategies.
RECOMMENDATION
Our findings suggest that you need to alter your marketing to ad-
just to the changing demographics for your products.
SUMMARY
As this report describes, we would attract more recent graduates
with the following strategies:
1. Establish a Web site where students can register and submit
online résumés.
2. Increase our advertising in local student newspapers and our
attendance at college career fairs.
3. Expand our local co-op program.
JUDGMENT
Based on the scope and degree of the tornado’s damage, the cur-
rent construction code for roofing on light industrial facilities is
inadequate.
IMPLICATION
Although our estimate calls for a substantially higher budget than
in the three previous years, we believe that it is reasonable given
our planned expansion.
PREDICTION
Although I have exceeded my original estimate for equipment,
I have reduced my labor costs; therefore, I will easily stay within
the original bid.
The concluding statement may merely present ideas for consideration,
call for action, or deliberately provoke thought.
IDEAS FOR CONSIDERATION
The new prices become effective the first of the year. Price adjust-
ments are routine for the company, but some of your customers
will not consider them acceptable. Please bear in mind the needs of
both your customers and the company as you implement these
price adjustments.
CALL FOR ACTION
Please send us a check for $250 now if you wish to keep your ac-
count active. If you have not responded to our previous letters

=== Page 128 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:48 AM Page 95
conjunctions 95
because of some special hardship, I will be glad to work out a solu-
tion with you.
C
THOUGHT-PROVOKING STATEMENT
Can we continue to accept the losses incurred by inefficiency? Or
should we take the necessary steps to control it now?
Be especially careful not to introduce a new topic when you conclude. A
conclusion should always relate to and reinforce the ideas presented
earlier in your writing. Moreover, the conclusions must be consistent
with what the introductionpromised the report would examine (its pur-
pose) and how it would do so (its method).
For guidance about the location of the conclusion section in a re-
port, see formal reports. For letter and other short closings, see corre-
spondence and entries on specific types of documents throughout this
book.
conjunctions
A conjunction connects words, phrases, or clausesand can also indicate
the relationship between the elements it connects.
A coordinating conjunction joins two sentence elements that have
identical functions. The coordinating conjunctions are and, but, or, for,
nor, yet, and so.
(cid:2) Nature andtechnology affect petroleum prices. [joins two nouns]
(cid:2) To hear andto listen are two different things. [joins two phrases]
(cid:2) I would like to include the survey, butthat would make the report
too long. [joins two clauses]
Coordinating conjunctions in the titles of books, articles, plays,
and movies should not be capitalized unless they are the first or last
word in the title.
(cid:2) Our library contains Consulting and Financial Independenceas
well as So You Want to Be a Consultant?
Occasionally, a conjunction may begin a sentence; in fact, conjunctions
can be strong transitional words and at times can provide emphasis. See
also transition.
(cid:2) I realize that the project is more difficult than expected and that
you have encountered staffing problems. Butwe must meet our
deadline.

=== Page 129 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:48 AM Page 96
96 connotation / denotation
Correlative conjunctionsare used in pairs. The correlative conjunctions
are either...or, neither...nor, not only...but also, both...and,
C and whether...or.
(cid:2) The inspector will arrive eitheron Wednesday oron Thursday.
A subordinating conjunction connects sentence elements of different
relative importance, normally independent and dependent clauses. Fre-
quently used subordinating conjunctions are so, although, after, be-
cause, if, where, than, since, as, unless, before, that, though, and when.
(cid:2) I left the lab afterfinishing the tests.
A conjunctive adverbhas the force of a conjunction because it joins two
independent clauses. The most common conjunctive adverbs are how-
ever, moreover, therefore, further, then, consequently, besides, accord-
ingly, also, and thus.
(cid:2) The engine performed well in the laboratory; however, it failed
under road conditions.
connotation / denotation
The denotations of a word are its literal meanings, as defined in a dic-
tionary. The connotations of a word are its meanings and associations
beyond its literal definitions. For example, the denotations of Holly-
woodare “a district of Los Angeles” and “the U.S. movie industry as a
whole”; its connotations for many are “glamour, opulence, and super-
ficiality.”
Often words have particular connotations for audiences within
professional groups and organizations. Choose words with both the
most accurate denotations and the most appropriate connotations for
the context. See also definingtermsand word choice.
consensus
Because consensus means “harmony of opinion” among most of those
in a group, the phrases consensus of opinionand general consensusde-
feat conciseness. The word consensus can be used to refer only to a
group, never to one or two people.
(cid:2) The generalconsensus of opinionamong researchers is that the
drug is ineffective.

=== Page 130 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:48 AM Page 97
contentmanagement 97
content management
C
Content management refers to the processes that organizations use to
manage the creation, tracking, and production of content, such as text
files, images, and other digital forms. A primary goal of content man-
agement is to make it easier for multiple writers to access, share, and
use such content. Content management aims to reduce the duplication
of effort, increase efficiency, and maintain consistent messages across
organizational documents (Web sites, printed text, and other media).
Writing for ContentManagement
Writing in a content-management environment challenges writers to
think of audience, purpose, and context broadly. The content you cre-
ate for instructions or marketing copy, for example, may be reused on a
Web site, in brochures, and in technical manuals. As a result, you must
either write a product description with a tone, style, and level of techni-
cal detail appropriate for all audiences or write the content so that it
can be easily altered for other contexts.
Writers who work with content management often develop infor-
mation modelsthat visually depict the guidelines, much like flowcharts,
for organizing and managing the content. These guidelines may direct
writers to code a passage or other content with “metadata” (terms,
symbols, or number combinations) so that it can be shared across an
organization. If you write for content management, then, you must un-
derstand your organization’s system for coding and preparing content
that can be reused in other documents. The technologies developed to
achieve the goals of content management are referred to as content-
management systems.
Content-ManagementSystems
Content-management systems are integrated software tools that help
organizations control the processes they use to manage and publish
content for organizational Web sites, widely used documents, inter-
active forms, and other media used across an organization. Types of
content-management systems include the following:
• Web Content-Management System: Provides tools for creating, up-
dating, and managing Web-site content. Some systems include
functions that allow Web managers to monitor workflow and
maintain the entire Web site.
• Document-Management System: Stores and tracks electronic docu-
ments or images of paper documents, allowing organizations to
replace their hard-copy files with sophisticated indexing, browsing,

=== Page 131 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:48 AM Page 98
98 context
and searching capabilities. Document-management systems often
include workflow tools that help writers track and manage changes
C to documents during review cycles, such as in collaborative writing
projects.
• Component Content-Management System: Manages content for
any media at the paragraph, sentence, and even word level.* For
example, a safety warning might state, “Don’t stick a fork in the
toaster.” With a component content-management system, a writer
can edit this warning to say “Don’t stick any silverware into the
toaster” and the system could automatically update all instances of
this warning in an organization’s manuals, help files, brochures,
Web pages, and other documents.
• Enterprise Content-Management System: Blends the functions of
Web, document, and often component content-management sys-
tems to create an all-in-one system for an entire organization. Such
systems aim to generate and organize content for various publica-
tions, media, and other important applications, such as e-mail,
financial record keeping, and human resource activities.
WEB LINK Content-ManagementSystems
For links to Web sites and books thatprovide information on content
managementand content-managementsystems,see bedfordstmartins
.com/alredtechand selectLinks for Handbook Entries.
context
Context is the environment or circumstances in which writers produce
documents and within which readers interpret their meanings. Every-
thing is written in a context, as illustrated in many entries and examples
throughout this book. This entry considers the significance of context
for documents and suggests how you can be aware of it as you write.
See also audience.
The context for any document, such as a proposal or report, is de-
termined by interrelated events or circumstances both inside and out-
side an organization.†For example, when you write a proposal to fund
*Such content-management systems are sometimes called “granularized” systems be-
cause they manage such small pieces of data (or “granules”).
†For a detailed illustration of specific documents that have been affected by particular
contexts, see Linda Driskill, “Understanding the Writing Context in Organizations,”
in Central Works in Technical Communication, ed. Johndan Johnson-Eilola and Stuart
Selber (New York: Oxford University Press, 2004), 55–69.

=== Page 132 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:48 AM Page 99
context 99
a project within your company, the economic condition of that com-
pany is part of the context that will determine how your proposal is re-
ceived. If the company has recently laid off a dozen employees, its C
management may not be inclined to approve a proposal to expand its
operations—regardless of how well the proposal is written.
When you correspond with someone, the events that prompted you
to write shape the context of the message and will affect what you say
and how you say it. If you write to a customer in response to a com-
plaint, for example, the toneand approach of your message will be de-
termined by the context—what you find when you investigate the issue.
Is your company fully or partly at fault? Has the customer incorrectly
used a product? contributed to a problem? (See also adjustmentletters.)
If you write a manual for auto-service technicians, other questions will
reveal the context. What are the lighting and other physical conditions
in garages? Will these physical conditions affect the layoutand design
of the manual? What potentially dangerous situations might the techni-
cians encounter?
Assessing Context
Each time you write, the context needs to be clearly in your mind so
that your document will achieve its purpose. The following questions
are starting points to help you become aware of the context, how it will
influence your approach and your readers’ interpretation of what you
have written, and how it will affect the decisions you need to make dur-
ing the writing process. See also “Five Steps to Successful Writing”
(page xv).
• What is your professional relationship with your readers, and how
might that affect the tone, style, and scopeof your writing? What
is “the story” behind the immediate reason you are writing; that is,
what series of events or perhaps previous documents led to your
need to write?
• What is the preferred medium of your readers? See also selecting
the medium.
• What specific factors (such as competition, finance, and regulation)
are recognized within your organization or department as impor-
tant?
• What is the corporate culture in which your readers work, and what
are the key values that you might find in its mission statement?
• What are the professional relationships among the specific readers
who will receive the document?
• What current events within or outside an organization or a depart-
ment may influence how readers interpret your writing?

=== Page 133 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:48 AM Page 100
100 continual / continuous
• What national cultural differences might affect your readers’
expectations or interpretations of the document? See also global
C communication.
As these questions suggest, context is very specific each time you write
and often involves, for example, the history of a specific organization or
your past dealings with individual readers.
Signaling Context
Because context is so important, it is often helpful to remind your
reader in some way of the context for your writing, as in the following
opening for a cover message to a proposal.
(cid:2) During our meeting on improving quality last week, you men-
tioned that we have previously required usability testing only for
documents going to high-profile clients because of the costs in-
volved. The idea occurred to me that we might try less extensive
usability testing for many of our other clients. Because you asked
for suggestions, I have proposed in the attached document a
method of limited usability testing for a broad range of clients
in order to improve overall quality.
Of course, as described in introductions, providing context for a reader
may require only a brief background statement or short reminders.
(cid:2) Several weeks ago, a financial adviser noticed a recurring prob-
lem in the software developed by Datacom Systems. Specifically,
error messages repeatedly appeared when, in fact, no specific
trouble...
(cid:2) Jane, as I promised in my e-mail yesterday, I’ve attached the
personnel budget estimates for the next fiscal year.
As the last example suggests, always provide some context when you
send an e-mailwith attachments.
continual / continuous
Continualimplies “happening over and over” or “frequently repeated.”
(“Writing well requires continualpractice.”) Continuousimplies “occur-
ring without interruption” or “unbroken.” (“The continuousroar of the
machinery was deafening.”)

=== Page 134 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 101
copyright 101
contractions
C
A contraction is a shortened spelling of a word or phrase with an apos-
trophe substituting for the missing letter or letters (cannot/can’t; have
not/haven’t; will not/won’t; it is/it’s). Contractions are often used in
speech and informal writing; they are generally not appropriate in re-
ports, proposals, and formal correspondence. See also technical writing
style.
copyright
Copyright establishes legal protection for literary, dramatic, musical,
artistic, and other intellectual works in printed or electronic form; it
gives the copyright owner exclusive rights to reproduce, distribute, per-
form, or display a work. Copyright protects all original works from the
moment of their creation, regardless of whether they are published or
contain a notice of copyright (©).
ETHICS NOTE If you plan to reproduce copyrighted material in your
own publication or on your Web site, you must obtain permission from
the copyright holder. To do otherwise is a violation of U.S. law. ✦
Permissions
To seek permission to reproduce copyrighted material, you must write
to the copyright holder. In some cases, it is the author; in other cases, it
is the editor or publisher of the work. For Web sites, read the site’s
“terms-of-use” information (if available) and e-mail your request to the
appropriate party. State specifically which portion of the work you wish
to reproduce and how you plan to use it. The copyright holder has the
right to charge a fee and specify conditions and limits of use.
Exceptions
Some print and Web material—including text, visuals, and other digital
forms—may be reproduced without permission. The rules governing
copyright can be complex, so it is prudent to check carefully the copy-
right status of anything you plan to reproduce.
• Educational material.A small amount of material from a copy-
righted source may be used for educational purposes (such as
classroom handouts) without permission or payment as long as
the use satisfies the “fair-use” criteria, as described at the U.S.
Copyright Office Web site, www.copyright.gov.

=== Page 135 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 102
102 correspondence
• Company boilerplate. Employees often borrow material freely
from in-house manuals, reports, and other company documents
C to save time and ensure consistency. Using such “boilerplate” or
“repurposed” material is not a copyright violation because the
company is considered the author of works prepared by its em-
ployees on the job. See also purpose.
• Public domain material. Works created by or for the U.S. govern-
ment and not classified or otherwise protected are in the public
domain—that is, they are not copyrighted. The same is true for
older written works when their copyright has lapsed or never ex-
isted. Be aware that some works in the public domain may include
“value-added” features, such as introductions, visuals, and in-
dexes, that are copyrighted separately from the original work.
• Copyleft Web material. Some public access Web sites, such as
Wikipedia, follow the “copyleft” principle and grant permission
to freely copy, distribute, or modify material.*
ETHICS NOTE Even when you use material that may be reproduced or
published without permission, you must nonetheless give appropriate
credit to the source from which the material is taken, as described in
plagiarismand documenting sources. ✦
correspondence
DIRECTORY
Audience and Writing Style 103
Goodwill and the “You”Viewpoint 104
Writer’s Checklist:Using Tone to Build Goodwill 105
Good-News and Bad-News Patterns 106
Openings and Closings 108
Clarity and Emphasis 109
Writer’s Checklist:Correspondence and Accuracy 110
Correspondence in the workplace—whether through e-mail, letters, or
memos—requires many of the same steps that are described in “Five
Steps to Successful Writing” (page xv). As you prepare an e-mail, for
*“Copyleft” is a play on the word copyrightand is the effort to free materials from
many of the restrictions of copyright. See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Copyleft.

=== Page 136 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 103
correspondence 103
example, you might study previous messages (research) and then list or
arrange the points you wish to cover (organization) in an order that is
logical for your audience. See also selectingthe medium. C
Corresponding with others in the workplace also requires that you
focus on both establishing or maintaining a positive working relation-
ship with your readers and conveying a professional image of yourself
and your organization.
Audience and Writing Style
Effective correspondence uses an appropriate conversational style. To
achieve that style, imagine your reader sitting across from you and
write to the reader as if you were talking face to face. Take into account
your reader’s needs and feelings. Ask yourself, “How might I feel if I re-
ceived this letter or e-mail?” and then tailor your message accordingly.
Remember, an impersonal and unfriendly message to a customer or
client can tarnish the image of you and your business, but a thoughtful
and sincere one can enhance it.
Whether you use a formal or an informal writing style depends en-
tirely on your reader and your purpose. You might use an informal (or
a casual) style, for example, with a colleague you know well and a for-
mal (or restrained) style with a client you do not know.
CASUAL It worked! The new process is better than we had
dreamed.
RESTRAINED You will be pleased to know that the new process is
more effective than we had expected.
You will probably find yourself using the restrained style more fre-
quently than the casual style. Remember that an overdone attempt to
sound casual or friendly can sound insincere. However, do not adopt so
formal a style that your writing reads like a legal contract. Affectation
not only will irritate and baffle readers but also can waste time and pro-
duce costly errors.
AFFECTED Per our dialogue yesterday, we no longer possess an
original copy of the brochure requested. Please be
advised that a PDF copy is attached to this e-mail.
IMPROVED We are out of original copies of the brochure we
discussed yesterday, so I am attaching a PDF copy
to this e-mail.
The improved version is not only clearer and less stuffy but also more
concise. See also technical writing styleand conciseness.

=== Page 137 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 104
104 correspondence
Goodwill and the “You”Viewpoint
Write concisely, but do not be so blunt that you risk losing the reader’s
C
goodwill. Responding to a vague written request with “Your request
was unclear” or “I don’t understand” could offend your reader. Instead,
establish goodwill to encourage your reader to provide the information
you need.
(cid:2) I will be glad to help, but I need more information to find the re-
port you requested. Specifically, can you give me the report’s title,
release date, or number?
Although this version is a bit longer, it is more tactful and will elicit a
faster response. See also telegraphic style.
You can also build goodwill by emphasizing the reader’s needs or
benefits. Suppose you received a refund request from a customer who
forgot to enclose the receipt with the request. In a response to that cus-
tomer, you might write the following:
WEAK We must receive the sales receipt before we can
process a refund.
[The writer’s needs are emphasized: “Wemust.”]
If you consider how you might keep the customer’s goodwill, you could
word the request this way:
IMPROVED Please mail or fax the sales receipt so that we can
process your refund.
[This is polite, but the writer’s needs are still empha-
sized: “so that wecan process.”]
You can put the reader’s needs and interests foremost by writing from
the reader’s perspective. Often, doing so means using the words you
and your rather than we, our, I, and mine—a technique called the
“you”viewpoint. Consider the following revision:
EFFECTIVE So that you can receive your refund promptly, please
mail or fax the sales receipt.
[The reader’s needs are emphasized with youand
your.]
This revision stresses the reader’s benefit and interest. By emphasizing
the reader’s needs, the writer will be more likely to accomplish the pur-
pose: to get the reader to act. See also positive writing.
If overdone, however, goodwill and the “you” viewpoint can pro-
duce writing that is fawning and insincere. Messages that are full of
excessive praise and inflated language may be ignored—or even re-
sented—by the reader.

=== Page 138 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 105
correspondence 105
EXCESSIVE You are just the kind of astute client that deserves
PRAISE the finest service that we can offer—and you deserve
our best deal. Knowing how carefully you make de- C
cisions, I know you’ll think about the advantages of
using our consulting service.
REASONABLE From our earlier correspondence, I understand your
need for reliable service. We strive to give all our
priority clients our full attention, and after you have
reviewed our proposal I am confident you will ap-
preciate our “five-star” consulting option.
WRITER’S CHECKLIST Using Tone to Build Goodwill
Use the following guidelines to achieve a tonethatbuilds goodwill with
your recipients.
(cid:3)
Be respectful,notdemanding.
DEMANDING Submityour answer in one week.
RESPECTFUL I would appreciate your answer within one week.
(cid:3)
Be modest,notarrogant.
ARROGANT My attached reportis thorough,and I’m sure thatyou
won’tbe able to continue withoutit.
MODEST The attached reportcontains details of the refinancing
options thatI hope you will find useful.
(cid:3)
Be polite,notsarcastic.
SARCASTIC I justnow received the shipmentwe ordered six
months ago.I’m sending itback—we can’tuse it
now.Thanks a lot!
POLITE I am returning the shipmentwe ordered on March 12.
Unfortunately,itarrived too late for us to be able to
use it.
(cid:3)
Be positive and tactful,notnegative and condescending.
NEGATIVE Your complaintaboutour prices is way off target.Our
prices are definitely notany higher than those of our
competitors.
TACTFUL Thank you for your suggestion concerning our prices.
We believe,however,thatour prices are competitive
with or lower than those of our competitors.

=== Page 139 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 106
106 correspondence
Good-News and Bad-News Patterns
Although the relative directness of correspondence may vary, it is gener-
C
ally more effective to present good news directly and bad news indi-
rectly, especially if the stakes are high.* This principle is based on the
fact that readers form their impressions and attitudes very early and
that you as a writer may want to subordinate the bad news to reasons
that make the bad news understandable. Further, if you are writing in-
ternational correspondence, understand that far more cultures are gen-
erally indirect in business messages than are direct.
Consider the thoughtlessness of the direct rejection in Figure C–8.
Although the message is concise and uses the pronouns you and your,
the writer does not consider how the recipient is likely to feel as she
reads the rejection. Its pattern is (1) the bad news, (2) an explanation,
and (3) the closing.
Dear Ms. Mauer:
Your application for the position of Cardiovascular Technician at
Southtown Cardiac Associates has been rejected. We have found
someone more qualified than you.
Sincerely,
FIGUREC–8. A Poor Bad-News Message
A better general pattern for bad news is (1) an opening that pro-
vides context (often called a “buffer”), (2) an explanation, (3) the bad
news, and (4) a goodwill closing. (See also refusal letters.) The opening
introduces the subject and establishes a professional tone. The body
provides an explanation by reviewing the facts that make the bad news
understandable. Although bad news is never pleasant, information that
either puts the bad news in perspective or makes it seem reasonable
promotes goodwill between the writer and the reader. The closing
should reinforce a positive relationship through goodwill or helpful in-
formation. Consider, for example, the courteous rejection shown in Fig-
ure C–9. It carries the same disappointing news as does the letter in
Figure C–8, but the writer is careful to thank the reader for her time
*Gerald J. Alred, “‘We Regret to Inform You’: Toward a New Theory of Negative
Messages,” in Studies in Technical Communication, ed. Brenda R. Sims (Denton:
University of North Texas and NCTE, 1993), 17–36.

=== Page 140 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 107
correspondence 107
Dear Ms. Mauer: C
Context Thank you for your time and effort in applying for the position
(or “buffer”) of Cardiovascular Technician at Southtown Cardiac Associates.
Explanation Because we need someone who can assume the duties here
leading to with a minimum of training, we have selected an applicant
bad news with several years of experience.
Your college record is excellent, and I encourage you to apply
Goodwill for another position with us in the future.
Sincerely,
FIGURE C–9. A Courteous Bad-News Message
and effort, explain why she was not accepted for the job, and offer her
encouragement.
This pattern can also be used in relatively short e-mail messages
and memos. Consider the unintended secondary message the following
notice conveys:
WEAK It has been decided that the office will be open the day
after Thanksgiving.
“It has been decided” not only sounds impersonal but also communi-
cates an authoritarian, management-versus-employee tone. The passive
voice also suggests that the decision-maker does not want to say “I have
decided” and thus accept responsibility. One solution is to remove the
first part of the sentence.
IMPROVED The office will be open the day after Thanksgiving.
The best solution, however, would be to suggest both that there is a
good reason for the decision and that employees are privy to (if not a
part of) the decision-making process.
EFFECTIVE Because we must meet the December 15 deadline for
submitting the Bradley Foundation proposal, the office
will be open the day after Thanksgiving.
By describing the context of the bad news first (the need to meet the
deadline), the writer focuses on the reasoning behind the decision to
work. Employees may not necessarily like the message, but they will at

=== Page 141 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 108
108 correspondence
least understand that the decision is not arbitrary and is tied to an im-
portant deadline.
C Presenting good news is, of course, easier. Present good news in
your opening. By doing so, you increase the likelihood that the reader
will pay careful attention to details, and you achieve goodwill from the
start. The pattern for good-news messages should be (1) a good-news
opening, (2) an explanation of facts, and (3) a goodwill closing. Figure
C–10 is an example of an effective good-news message.
Dear Ms. Mauer:
Good news We are pleased to offer you the position of Cardiovascular
Technician at Southtown Cardiac Associates at the salary of
$54,300. Your qualifications fit our needs precisely, and we
hope you will accept our offer.
Explanation If the terms we discussed in the interview are acceptable to
you, please come to the main office at 9:30 a.m. on November
16. At that time, we will ask you to complete our benefits form,
in addition to...
Goodwill I, as well as the others in the office, look forward to working
with you. Everyone was favorably impressed with you during
your interview.
Sincerely,
FIGURE C–10. A Good-News Message
Openings and Closings
Although methods of development vary, the opening of any correspon-
dence should identify the subject and often the main point of the message.
E-MAIL Attached is the final installation report, which I hope you
can review by Monday, December 7. You will notice that
the report includes...
LETTER Enclosed with this letter is your refund check for the de-
fective compressor, number AJ50172. I have also enclosed
a catalog of our latest...
MEMO ACM Electronics has asked us to prepare a comprehensive
set of brochures for its Milwaukee office by August 10,
2009. We have worked with similar firms in the past...

=== Page 142 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 109
correspondence 109
When your reader is not familiar with the subject or with the back-
ground of a problem, you may provide an introductory paragraph be-
fore stating the main point of the message. Doing so is especially C
important in correspondence that will serve as a record of crucial infor-
mation. Generally, longer or complex subjects benefit most from more
thorough introductions. However, even when you are writing a short
message about a familiar subject, remind readers of the context. In the
following example, words that provide context are shown in italics.
(cid:2) As Maria Lopez recommended, I reviewed the office reorganiza-
tion plan. I like most of the features; however,...
Do not state the main point first when (1) readers are likely to be highly
skeptical or (2) key readers, such as managers or clients, may disagree
with your position. In those cases, a more persuasive tactic is to state
the problem or issue first, then present the specific points supporting
your final recommendation, as discussed in the earlier section on bad-
news messages. See also persuasion.
Your closing can accomplish many important tasks, such as build-
ing positive relationships with readers, encouraging colleagues and em-
ployees, and letting recipients know what you will do or what you
expect of them.
(cid:2) I will discuss the problem with the marketing consultant and let
you know by Wednesday what we are able to change.
Although routine statements are sometimes unavoidable (“If you have
further questions, please let me know”), try to make your closing work
for you by providing specific prompts to which the reader can respond.
See also conclusions.
(cid:2) Thanks again for the report, and let me know if you want me to
send you a copy of the test results.
Clarity and Emphasis
A clear message is one that is adequately developed and emphasizes
your main points. The following example illustrates how adequate de-
velopment is crucial to the clarityof your message.
VAGUE Be more careful on the loading dock.
DEVELOPED To prevent accidents on the loading dock, follow
these procedures:
1. Check...
2. Load only...
3. Replace...

=== Page 143 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 110
110 correspondence
Although the first version is concise, it is not as clear and specific as the
“developed” revision. Do not assume your readers will know what you
C mean: vague messages are easily misinterpreted.
Lists. Vertically stacked words, phrases, and other items with numbers
or bullets can effectively highlight such information as steps in se-
quence, materials or parts needed, key or concluding points, and rec-
ommendations. As described in the entry lists, make sure you provide
context. Be careful not to overuse lists—a message that consists almost
entirely of lists is difficult to understand because it forces readers to
connect separate and disjointed items. Further, lists lose their effective-
ness when they are overused.
Headings. Headingsare particularly useful because they call attention
to main topics, divide material into manageable segments, and signal a
shift in topic. Readers can scan the headings and read only the section
or sections appropriate to their needs.
Subject Lines. Subject lines for e-mails, memos, and some letters an-
nounce the topic and focus of the correspondence. Because they also aid
filing and later retrieval, they must be specific and accurate.
VAGUE Subject: Tuition Reimbursement
VAGUE Subject: Time-Management Seminar
SPECIFIC Subject: Tuition Reimbursement for Time-Management
Seminar
Capitalize all major words in a subject line except articles, prepositions,
and conjunctions with fewer than five letters (unless they are the first or
last words). Remember that the subject line should not substitute for an
opening that provides context for the message.
WRITER’S CHECKLIST Correspondence and Accuracy
(cid:3)
Begin by establishing your purpose,analyzing your reader’s needs,de-
termining your scope,and considering the context.
(cid:3)
Prepare an outline,even if itis only a listof points to be covered in the
order you wantto cover them (see outlining).
(cid:3)
Write the firstdraft(see writing a draft).
(cid:3)
Allow for a cooling-off period prior to revisionor seek a colleague’s
advice,especially for correspondence thataddresses a problem.
(cid:3)
Revise the draft,checking for key problems in clarity and coherence.
(cid:3)
Use the appropriate or standard format(see e-mail,letters,and
memos).

=== Page 144 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 111
cover letters 111
Writer’s Checklist:Correspondence and Accuracy (continued)
(cid:3)
Check for accuracy:Make sure thatall facts,figures,and dates are
C
correct.
(cid:3)
Use effective proofreadingtechniques to check for punctuation,
grammar,spelling,and appropriate usage.
(cid:3)
Consider who should receive a copy of the message and in whatorder
the names or e-mail addresses should be listed (alphabetize if rank
does notapply).
(cid:3)
Remember thatwhen you sign a letter or send a memo or an e-mail,
you are accepting responsibility for it.
cover letters (or transmittals)
Acover letter, memo, or e-mailaccompanies a document (such as a pro-
posal), an electronic file, or other material. It identifies an item that is
being sent, the person to whom it is being sent, the reason that it is being
sent, and any content that should be highlighted for readers (see pur-
pose). A cover letter provides a permanent record for both the writer
and the reader. For cover letters to résumés, see application letters.
The example in Figure C–11 is concise, but it also includes details
such as how the information for the reportwas gathered.
Dear Mr. Hammersmith:
Attached is the report estimating our energy needs for the year as re-
quested by John Brenan, Vice President, on September 4.
The report is a result of several meetings with the manager of plant op-
erations and her staff and an extensive survey of all our employees. The
survey was delayed by the transfer of key staff in Building A. We be-
lieve, however, that the report will provide the information you need
in order to furnish us with a cost estimate for the installation of your
Mark II Energy Saving System.
We would like to thank Diana Biel of ESI for her assistance in prepar-
ing the survey. If you need any more information, please let me know.
Sincerely,
FIGURE C–11. Cover Message

=== Page 145 ===
6860ch0C.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 112
112 credible / creditable
credible / creditable
C
Something is credibleif it is believable. (“The statistics in this report are
credible.”) Something is creditable if it is worthy of praise or credit.
(“The lead engineer did a creditablejob.”)
criteria / criterion
Criterionis a singular nounmeaning “an established standard for judg-
ing or testing.” Criteriaand criterionsare both acceptable plural forms
of criterion, but criteriais generally preferred.
critique
A critique is a written or an oral evaluation of something. Avoid using
critiqueas a verbmeaning “criticize.”
prepare a of
(cid:2) Please critique his job description.
^ ^

=== Page 146 ===
6860ch0D.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 113
D
D
dangling modifiers
Phrases that do not clearly and logically refer to the correct noun or
pronoun are called dangling modifiers. Dangling modifiers usually ap-
pear at the beginning of a sentence as an introductory phrase.
DANGLING While eating lunch, the computer malfunctioned.
[Whowas eating lunch?]
CORRECT While Iwas eating lunch, the computer malfunctioned.
Dangling modifiers can appear at the end of the sentence as well.
DANGLING The program gains efficiency byeliminating the super-
fluous instructions.
[Whoeliminates the superfluous instructions?]
CORRECT The program gains efficiency when youeliminate the
superfluous instructions.
To correct a dangling modifier, add the appropriate subject to either the
dangling modifier or the main clause.
DANGLING After finishing the research, the proposal was easy to
write.
[The appropriate subject is I, but it is not stated in ei-
ther the dangling phrase or the main clause.]
CORRECT After Ifinished the research, the proposal was easy to
write.
[The pronoun Iis now the subject of an introductory
clause.]
CORRECT After finishing the research, Ifound the proposal easy
to write.
[The pronoun Iis now the subject of the main clause.]
For a discussion of misplaced modifiers, see modifiers.
113

=== Page 147 ===
6860ch0D.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 114
114 dashes
dashes
The dash (—) can perform all the punctuation duties of linking, sepa-
rating, and enclosing. The dash, sometimes indicated by two consecu-
D
tive hyphens, can also indicate the omission of letters. (Mr. A—
admitted his error.)
Use the dash cautiously to indicate more emphasis, informality, or
abruptness than the other punctuation marks would show. A dash can
emphasize a sharp turn in thought.
(cid:2) The project will end May 15—unless we receive additional
funding.
A dash can indicate an emphatic pause.
(cid:2) The project will begin—after we are under contract.
Sometimes, to emphasize contrast, a dash is used with but.
(cid:2) We completed the survey quickly—butthe results were not accu-
rate.
A dash can be used before a final summarizing statement or before rep-
etition that has the effect of an afterthought.
(cid:2) It was hot near the heat-treating ovens—steaming hot.
Such a statement may also complete the meaning of the clause preced-
ing the dash.
(cid:2) We try to write as we speak—or so we believe.
Dashes set off parenthetical elements more sharply and emphatically
than commas. Unlike dashes, parentheses tend to deemphasize what
they enclose. Compare the following sentences:
(cid:2) Only one person—the president—can authorize such activity.
(cid:2) Only one person, the president, can authorize such activity.
(cid:2) Only one person (the president) can authorize such activity.
Dashes can be used to set off parenthetical elements that contain com-
mas.
(cid:2) Three of the applicants—John Evans, Rosalita Fontiana, and
Kyong-Shik Choi—seem well qualified for the job.
The first word after a dash is capitalized only if it is a proper noun.

=== Page 148 ===
6860ch0D.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 115
dates 115
data
In formal and scholarly writing, datais generally used as a plural, with
datumas the singular form. In much informal writing, however, datais
D
considered a collective singular noun. Base your decision on whether
your audience should consider the data as a single collection or as a
group of individual facts. Whatever you decide, be sure that your pro-
nouns and verbs agree in number with the selected usage. See also
agreementand English,varieties of.
(cid:2) These data arepersuasive. They indicatea need for additional re-
search questions. [formal]
(cid:2) The attached dataisconfidential. It isthe result of a survey of em-
ployee records. [less formal]
dates
In the United States, full dates are generally written in the month-day-
year format, with a comma preceding and following the year.
(cid:2) November 30, 2020, is the payoff date.
Do not use commas in the day-month-year format, which is used in
many parts of the world and by the U.S. military.
(cid:2) Note that 30 November 2020 is the payoff date.
No commas are used when showing only the month-year or month-day
in a date.
(cid:2) The target date of May 2012 is optimistic, so I would like to meet
on March 4 to discuss our options.
When writing days of the month without the year, use the cardinal
number (“March 4”) rather than the ordinal number (“March 4th”).
Of course, in speech or presentations, use the ordinal number (“March
fourth”).
Avoid the strictly numerical form for dates (11/6/12) because the
date is not always immediately clear, especially in international corre-
spondence. In many countries, 11/6/12 means June 11, 2012, rather
than November 6, 2012. Writing out the name of the month makes the
entire date immediately clear to all readers.
Centuries often cause confusion with numbers because their
spelled-out forms, which are not capitalized, do not correspond with

=== Page 149 ===
6860ch0D.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 116
116 defective / deficient
their numeral designations. The twentieth century, for example, is the
1900s: 1900–1999.
When the century is written as a noun, do not use a hyphen.
(cid:2) During the twentieth century, technology transformed business
D
practices.
When the centuries are written as adjectives, however, use hyphens.
(cid:2) Twenty-first-century technology relies on dependable power
sources.
defective / deficient
If something is defective, it is faulty. (“The wiring was defective.”) If
something is deficient, it is lacking or is incomplete in an essential com-
ponent. (“The patient’s diet was deficientin calcium.”)
defining terms
Defining key terms and concepts is often essential for clarity. Terms can
be defined either formally or informally, depending on your purpose,
your audience, and the context.
A formal definitionis a form of classification. You define a term by
placing it in a category and then identifying the features that distinguish
it from other members of the same category.
TERM CATEGORY DISTINGUISHING FEATURES
An annualis a plant thatcompletes its life cycle,from
seed to natural death,in one grow-
ing season.
An informal definition explains a term by giving a more familiar word
or phrase as a synonym.
(cid:2) Plants have a symbiotic, ormutually beneficial, relationship with
certain kinds of bacteria.
State definitions positively; focus on what the term is rather than on
what it is not.
NEGATIVE In a legal transaction, real propertyis not personal
property.
POSITIVE Real propertyis legal terminology for the right or inter-
est a person has in land and the permanent structures
on that land.

=== Page 150 ===
6860ch0D.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 117
definition method of development 117
For a discussion of when negative definitions are appropriate, see defi-
nition method of development.
Avoid circular definitions, which merely restate the term to be de-
fined and therefore fail to clarify it.
D
CIRCULAR Spontaneous combustionis fire that begins
spontaneously.
REVISED Spontaneous combustionis the self-ignition of a
flammable material through a chemical reaction.
In addition, avoid “is when” and “is where” definitions. Such defini-
tions fail to include the category and are too indirect.
a medical procedure in which
(cid:2) A biopsyis whena tissue sample is removed for testing.
^
In technical writing, as illustrated in this example, definitions often con-
tain the purpose (“testing”) of what is defined (biopsy).
definite / definitive
Definite and definitive both apply to what is precisely defined, but de-
finitivemore often refers to what is complete and authoritative. (“Once
we receive a definite proposal, our attorney can provide a definitive
legal opinion.”)
definition method of development
Definition is often essential to clarity and accuracy. Although defining
terms may be sufficient, sometimes definitions need to be expanded
through (1) extended definition, (2) definition by analogy, (3) definition
by cause, (4) definition by components, (5) definition by exploration of
origin, and (6) negative definition. See also methods of development.
Extended Definition
When you need more than a simple definition to explain an idea, use
an extended definition, which explores a number of qualities of the item
being defined. How an extended definition is developed depends on
your audience and on the complexity of the subject. Readers familiar
with a topic might be able to handle a long, fairly complex definition,
whereas readers less familiar with a topic might require simpler lan-
guage and more basic information.

=== Page 151 ===
6860ch0D.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 118
118 definition method of development
The easiest way to give an extended definition is with specific ex-
amples. Examples give readers easy-to-picture details that help them see
and thus understand the term being defined.
(cid:2) Form, which is the shape of landscape features, can best be repre-
D
sented both by small-scale features, such as treesand shrubs, and
by large-scale elements, such as mountainsand mountain ranges.
Definition by Analogy
Another useful way to define a difficult concept, especially when you are
writing for nonspecialists, is to use an analogy. An analogy can help the
reader understand an unfamiliar term by showing its similarities with a
more familiar term. In the following description of radio waves in terms
of their length (long) and frequency (low), notice how the writer devel-
ops an analogy to show why a low frequency is advantageous.
(cid:2) The low frequency makes it relatively easy to produce a sound wave
having virtually all its power concentrated at one frequency. Think,
for example, of a group of people lost in a forest. If they hear sounds
of a search party in the distance, they all will begin to shout for help
in different directions. Not a very efficient process, is it? But suppose
all of the energy that went into the production of this noise could be
concentrated into a single shout or whistle. Clearly the chances that
the group will be found would be much greater.
Definition by Cause
Some terms are best defined by an explanation of their causes. In the
following example from a professional journal, a nurse describes an ap-
paratus used to monitor blood pressure in severely ill patients. Called
an indwelling catheter, the device displays blood-pressure readings on
an oscilloscope and on a numbered scale. Users of the device, the writer
explains, must understand what a dampened wave formis.
(cid:2) The dampened wave form, the smoothing out or flattening of the
pressure wave form on the oscilloscope, is usually caused by an ob-
struction that prevents blood pressure from being freely transmitted
to the monitor. The obstruction may be a small clot or bit of fibrin
at the catheter tip. More likely, the catheter tip has become posi-
tioned against the artery wall and is preventing the blood from
flowing freely.
Definition by Components
Sometimes a formal definition of a concept can be made simpler by
breaking the concept into its component parts. In the following ex-
ample, the formal definition of fire is given in the first paragraph, and
the component parts are given in the second.

=== Page 152 ===
6860ch0D.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 119
definition method of development 119
FORMAL Fire is the visible heat energy released from the rapid
DEFINITION oxidation of a fuel. A substance is “on fire” when
the release of heat energy from the oxidation process
reaches visible light levels.
COMPONENT The classic fire triangle illustrates the elements D
PARTS necessary to create fire: oxygen, heat, and burnable
material(fuel). Air provides sufficient oxygen for
combustion; the intensity of the heat needed to start
a fire depends on the characteristics of the burnable
material. A burnable substance is one that will sus-
tain combustion after an initial application of heat
to start the combustion.
Definition by Exploration of Origin
Under certain circumstances, the meaning of a term can be clarified and
made easier to remember by an exploration of its origin. Medical terms,
because of their sometimes unfamiliar Greek and Latin roots, benefit es-
pecially from an explanation of this type. Tracing the derivation of a
word also can be useful when you want to explain why a word has favor-
able or unfavorable associations, particularly if your goal is to influence
your reader’s attitude toward an idea or activity. See also persuasion.
(cid:2) Efforts to influence legislation generally fall under the head of lob-
bying, a term that once referred to people who prowled the lobbies
of houses of government, buttonholing lawmakers and trying to
get them to take certain positions. Lobbying today is all of this,
and much more, too. It is a respected—and necessary—activity.
It tells the legislator which way the winds of public opinion are
blowing, and it helps inform [legislators] of the implications of
certain bills, debates, and resolutions [that they must face].
—Bill Vogt, How to Build a Better Outdoors
Negative Definition
In some cases, it is useful to point out what something is not to clarify
what it is. A negative definition is effective only when the reader is fa-
miliar with the item with which the defined item is contrasted. If you
say “xis not y,” your readers must understand the meaning of yfor the
explanation to make sense. In a crane operator’s manual, for instance, a
negative definition is used to show that, for safety reasons, a hydraulic
crane cannot be operated in the same manner as a lattice boom crane.
(cid:2) A hydraulic crane is notlike a lattice boom crane [a friction ma-
chine] in one very important way. In most cases, the safe lifting ca-
pacity of a lattice boom crane is based on the weight needed to tip
the machine. Therefore, operators of friction machines sometimes

=== Page 153 ===
6860ch0D.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 120
120 description
depend on signs that the machine might tip to warn them of impend-
ing danger. This practice is very dangerous with a hydraulic crane.
—Operator’s Manual(Model W-180), Harnischfeger Corporation
D
description
The key to effective description is the accurate presentation of details,
whether for simple or complex descriptions. In Figure D–1, notice that
the simple description contained in the purchase order includes five spe-
cific details (in addition to the part number) structured logically.
PURCHASE ORDER
PART NO. DESCRIPTION QUANTITY
IW 8421 Infectious-waste bags, 12′′×14′′, 5 boxes containing
heavy-gauge polyethylene, red 200 bags per box
double closures with self-sealing
adhesive strips
FIGURE D–1. Simple Description
Complex descriptions, of course, involve more details. In describ-
ing a mechanical device, for example, describe the whole device and its
function before giving a detailed description of how each part works.
The description should conclude with an explanation of how each part
contributes to the functioning of the whole.
In descriptions intended for readers who are unfamiliar with the
topic, details are crucial. For such an audience, show or demonstrate
(as opposed to “tell”) primarily through the use of images and details.
Notice the use of color, shapes, and images in the following description
of a company’s headquarters. The writer assumes that the reader knows
such terms as colonial designand haiku fountain.
(cid:2) Their corporate headquarters, which reminded me of a rural col-
lege campus, are located north of the city in a 90-acre lush green
wooded area. The complex consists of five three-story buildings of
colonial design. The buildings are spaced about 50 feet apart and
are built in a U shape surrounding a reflection pool that frames a
striking haiku fountain.
You can also use analogy, as described in figures of speech, to explain
unfamiliar concepts in terms of familiar ones, such as “U shape” in the
previous example or “armlike block” in Figure D–2.

=== Page 154 ===
6860ch0D.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 121
description 121
The die block assemblyshown in Figure 1 consists of two machined block Number
sections, eight code punch pins, and a feed punch pin. The larger section, of features
called the die block, is fashioned of a hard noncorrosive beryllium-copper and rela-
D
alloy. It houses the eight code punch pins and the smaller feed punch pin tive size
in nine finely machined guide holes. differences
noted
Figure 1. Die Block Assembly
The guide holes in the upper part of the die block are made smaller to
Figure of conform to the thinner tips of the feed punch pins. Extending over the top
speech of the die block and secured to it at one end is a smaller, armlike block
called the stripper block. The stripper block is made from hardened tool
steel, and it also has been drilled through with nine finely machined guide
holes. It is carefully fitted to the die block at the factory so that its holes
will be precisely above those in the die block and so that the space left
between the blocks will measure .015′′(±.003′′). The residue from the
Definition punching operation, called chad, is pushed out through the top of the strip-
per block and guided out of the assembly by means of a plastic residue
chad collectorand chad collector extender.
FIGURE D–2. Complex Description

=== Page 155 ===
6860ch0D.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 122
122 design
Visualscan be powerful aids in descriptive writing, especially when
they show details too intricate to explain completely in words. The ex-
ample in Figure D–2 uses an illustration to help describe a mechanical
assembly for an assembler or repairperson. Note that the description
D concentrates on the number of pieces—their sizes, shapes, and dimen-
sions—and on their relationship to one another to perform their func-
tion. It also specifies the materials of which the hardware is made.
Because the description is illustrated (with identifying labels) and is in-
tended for technicians who have been trained on the equipment, it does
not require the use of bridging devices to explain the unfamiliar in rela-
tion to the familiar. Even so, an important term is defined (“chad”), and
crucial alignment dimensions are specified (± .003′′).The illustration is
labeled appropriately and integrated with text of the description.
design (see layout and design)
despite / in spite of
Although there is no literal difference between despite and in spite of,
despitesuggests an effort to avoid blame.
(cid:2) Despiteour best efforts, the plan failed.
[We are not to blame for the failure.]
(cid:2) In spite ofour best efforts, the plan failed.
[We did everything possible, but failure overcame us.]
Despite and in spite of (both meaning “notwithstanding”) should not
be blended into despite of.
In spite of
(cid:2) Despite ofour best efforts, the plan failed.
^
diagnosis / prognosis
Because they sound somewhat alike, these words are often confused
with each other. Diagnosis means “an analysis of the nature of some-
thing” or “the conclusions reached by such analysis.” (“The meteorologi-
cal diagnosis was that the pollution resulted from natural contami-
nants.”) Prognosis means “a forecast or prediction.” (“The meteorolo-
gist’s prognosisis that contaminant levels will increase over the next ten
years.”)

=== Page 156 ===
6860ch0D.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 123
dictionaries 123
dictionaries
Dictionaries give more than just information about the meanings of
words. As illustrated in Figure D–3, they often provide words’ etymolo-
D
gies (origins and history), forms, pronunciations, spellings, uses as idi-
oms, and functions as parts of speech. For certain words, a dictionary
lists synonyms and may also provide illustrations, if appropriate, such
as tables, maps, photographs, and drawings.
Pronunciation
Word
Word
endings
Spelling division Part of speech
re·gard (ri-gärd) v. -gard·ed, -gard·ing, -gards. — tr. 1. To look at attentively;
observe closely. 2. To look upon or consider in a particular way: I regard him as
a fool. 3. To hold in esteem or respect: She regards her teachers highly. 4. To
relate or refer to; concern: This item regards their liability. 5. To take into
Meanings account; consider. 6. Obsolete. To take care of. — intr. 1. To look or gaze. 2. To
give heed; pay attention. — regard n. 1. A look or gaze. 2. Careful thought or
attention; heed: She gives little regard to her appearance. 3. a. Respect,
Usage label affection, or esteem: He has high regard for your work. b. regards. Good wishes
expressing such sentiment: Give the family my best regards. 4. A particular
point or aspect; respect: She was lucky in that regard. 5. Basis for action; motive.
Idioms 6. Obsolete. Appearance or aspect. Idioms. as regards. Concerning. In (or with)
regard to. With respect to. [Middle English regarden, from Old French
Etymology
regarder: re-, re + garder, to guard (of Germanic origin; see GUARD).]
SYNONYMS: regard, esteem, admiration, respect. These nouns refer to a
feeling based on perception of a measure of approval for the worth of a person or
thing. Regard is the least forceful and most general: Please give your parents my
warmest regards. “I once thought you had a kind of regard for her” (George
Borrow). Esteem connotes considered appraisal and positive regard: “The
Synonyms
near-unanimity of esteem he enjoyed during his lifetime has by no means been
sustained since” (Will Crutchfield). Admiration is a feeling of keen
approbation: “Greatness is a spiritual condition worthy to excite love, interest,
and admiration” (Matthew Arnold). Respect implies appreciative, often
deferential regard resulting from careful assessment: “I have a great respect for
any man who makes his own way in life” (Winston Churchill). See also
Synonyms at consider.
USAGE NOTE: Regard is traditionally used in the singular in the phrase in
regard (not in regards) to. Regarding and as regards are also standard in the
Usage note sense “with reference to.” In the same sense with respect to is acceptable, but
respecting is not. Respects is sometimes considered preferable to regards in the
sense of “particular”: In some respects (not regards) the books are alike.
FIGURE D–3. Dictionary Entry

=== Page 157 ===
6860ch0D.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 124
124 dictionaries
WEB LINK Online Dictionaries
Dictionaries available on the Web often include a human-voice pro-
nunciation of words and thesaurus links.For a listof currentonline
D dictionaries,see bedfordstmartins.com/alredtechand selectLinks for
Handbook Entries.
Abridged Dictionaries
Abridged or desk dictionaries contain words commonly used in schools
and offices. There is no single “best” dictionary, but you should choose
the most recent edition with upward of 200,000 entries. The following
are reputable dictionaries.
The American Heritage College Dictionary, 4th ed., with CD-ROM,
2006
Microsoft Encarta World English Dictionary, free online edition at
encarta.msn.com
Random House Webster’s College Dictionary with CD-ROM, 2005
Unabridged Dictionaries
Unabridged dictionaries provide complete and authoritative linguistic
information. Because the size and cost of the printed, CD, and online
subscription versions are impractical for many individual users, li-
braries make available these important reference sources.
• The Oxford English Dictionary, 2nd ed., is the standard historical
dictionary of the English language. Its 20 volumes contain over
500,000 words and give the chronological developments of over
240,000 words, providing numerous examples of uses and sources.
It is also available on CD-ROM and online.
• Webster’s Third New International Dictionary, Unabridged, CD-
ROM edition, contains over 450,000 entries. Word meanings are
listed in historical order, with the current meaning given last.
ESL Dictionaries
English-as-a-second-language (ESL) dictionaries are more helpful to the
nonnative speaker than are regular English dictionaries or bilingual dic-
tionaries. The pronunciation symbols in ESL dictionaries are based on
the international phonetic alphabet rather than on English phonetic sys-
tems, and useful grammatical information is included in both the en-
tries and special grammar sections. In addition, the definitions usually
are easier to understand than those in regular English dictionaries; for

=== Page 158 ===
6860ch0D.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 125
differentfrom / differentthan 125
example, a regular English dictionary defines opaqueas “impervious to
the passage of light,” while an ESL dictionary defines the word as “not
allowing light to pass through.” The definitions in ESL dictionaries also
are usually more thorough than those in bilingual dictionaries. For ex-
ample, a bilingual dictionary might indicate that obstacleand blockade D
are synonymous—but not indicate that only obstacle can be used for
abstract meanings. (Lack of money can be an obstacle[not a blockade]
to a college education.)
The following dictionaries and references provide helpful informa-
tion for nonnative speakers of English.
Longman Advanced American Dictionarywith CD-ROM
Longman Dictionary of American Englishwith CD-ROM
Longman American Idioms Dictionarywith CD-ROM, Karen Stern
Oxford American Wordpower Dictionary for Learners of English,
Ruth Urbom
SubjectDictionaries
For the meanings of words too specialized for a general dictionary, a
subject dictionary is useful. Subject dictionaries define terms used in a
particular field, such as business, geography, architecture, or consumer
affairs. Definitions in subject dictionaries are generally more detailed
and comprehensive than those found in general dictionaries, but they
are written in language that can be understood by nonspecialists. One
well-known example is Stedman’s Medical Dictionary (Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins).
differ from / differ with
Differ from suggests that two things are not alike. (“Our earlier pro-
posal differs fromthe current one.”) Differ withindicates disagreement
between persons. (“The architect differed with the contractor on the
proposed site.”)
different from / different than
In formal writing, the preposition from is used with different. (“The
product I received is different from the one I ordered.”) Different than
is used when it is followed by a clause. (“The actual cost was different
thanwe estimated in our proposal.”)

=== Page 159 ===
6860ch0D.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 126
126 directaddress
direct address
Direct address refers to a sentence or phrase in which the person being
spoken or written to is explicitly named. It is often used in presenta-
D
tions and in e-mail messages. Notice that the person’s name in a direct
address is set off by commas.
(cid:2) John, call me as soon as you arrive at the airport.
(cid:2) Call me, John, as soon as you arrive at the airport.
discreet / discrete
Discreetmeans “having or showing prudent or careful behavior.” (“Be-
cause the matter was personal, he asked Bob to be discreet.”) Discrete
means something is “separate, distinct, or individual.” (“The court or-
dered tests on three discretesamples.”)
disinterested / uninterested
Disinterestedmeans “impartial, objective, unbiased.”
(cid:2) Like good judges, researchers should be passionately interested in
the problems they tackle but completely disinterestedwhen they
seek to solve those problems.
Uninterestedmeans simply “not interested.”
(cid:2) Despite Asha’s enthusiasm, her manager remained uninterestedin
the project.
division-and-classification method
of development
An effective method of development for a complex subject is either to
divide it into manageable parts and then discuss each part separately
(division) or to classify (or group) individual parts into appropriate cat-
egories and discuss each category separately (classification). See also in-
structionsand process explanation.

=== Page 160 ===
6860ch0D.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 127
division-and-classification method of development 127
Division
You might use division to describe a physical object, such as the parts
of a copy machine; to examine an organization, such as a company; or
to explain the components of a system, such as the Internet. The em-
D
phasis in division as a method of development is on breaking down a
complex whole into a number of like units—it is easier to consider
smaller units and to examine the relationship of each to the other than
to attempt to discuss the whole. The basis for division depends, of
course, on your subject and your purpose.
If you were a financial planner describing the types of mutual funds
available to your investors, you could divide the variety available into
three broad categories: money-market funds, bond funds, and stock
funds. Such division would be accurate, but it would be only a first-
level grouping of a complex whole. The three broad categories could, in
turn, be subdivided into additional groups based on investment strat-
egy, as follows:
Money-market funds
• Taxable money market • Tax-exempt money market
Bond funds
• Taxable bonds • Balanced (mix of stocks and bonds)
• Tax-exempt bonds
Stock funds
• Balanced • International growth
• Equity income • Small capitalization
• Domestic growth • Aggressive growth
• Growth and income • Specialized
Specialized stock funds could be further subdivided as follows:
Specialized funds
• Communications • Health services
• Energy • Technology
• Environmental services • Utilities
• Financial services • Worldwide capital goods
• Gold
Classification
The process of classification is the grouping of a number of units (such
as people, objects, or ideas) into related categories, as in Figure D–4.
Consider the following list:
triangular file steel tape ruler needle-nose pliers
vise pipe wrench keyhole saw

=== Page 161 ===
6860ch0D.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 128
128 division-and-classification method of development
mallet tin snips C-clamps
rasp hacksaw plane
glass cutter ball-peen hammer steel square
spring clamp claw hammer utility knife
D crescentwrench folding extension ruler slip-jointpliers
crosscutsaw tack hammer utility scissors
To group the items in the list, you would first determine what they have
in common. The most obvious characteristic they share is that they all
belong in a carpenter’s tool chest (Figure D–4). With that observation
as a starting point, you can begin to group the tools into related cate-
Triangular
file Rasp Plane
Tools that smooth
Ball-peen
Mallet Claw hammer Tack hammer hammer
Tools that hammer
Folding extension
Steel square Steel tape ruler ruler
Tools that measure
Needle-nose Crescent Slip-joint Spring
Vise pliers Pipe wrench C-clamps wrench pliers clamp
Tools that grip
Keyhole Crosscut Glass Tin Utility Utility
Hacksaw saw saw cutter snips knife scissors
Tools that cut
FIGURED–4. Classification (Tools Placed into Categories)

=== Page 162 ===
6860ch0D.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 129
documenting sources 129
gories. Pipe wrenches belong with slip-joint pliers because both tools
grip objects. The rasp and the plane belong with the triangular file be-
cause all three tools smooth rough surfaces. By applying this kind of
thinking to all the items in the list, you can group (classify) the tools ac-
cording to function. D
To classify a subject, you must first sort the individual items into
the largest number of comparable groups. For explaining the functions
of carpentry tools, the classifications (or groups) in Figure D–4
(smoothing, hammering, measuring, gripping, and cutting) are excel-
lent. For recommending which tools a new homeowner should buy
first, however, those classifications are not helpful—each group con-
tains tools that a new homeowner might want to purchase right away.
To give homeowners advice on purchasing tools, you probably would
classify the types of repairs they most likely will have to do (plumbing,
painting, etc.). That classification could serve as a guide to tool pur-
chase.
Once you have established the basis for the classification, apply it
consistently, putting each item in only one category. For example, it
might seem logical to classify needle-nose pliers as both a tool that cuts
and a tool that grips because most needle-nose pliers have a small sec-
tion for cutting wires. However, the primary function of needle-nose
pliers is to grip. So listing them only under “tools that grip” would be
consistent with the basis used for listing the other tools.
documenting sources
DIRECTORY
APA Documentation 132
APA In-TextCitations 132
APA Documentation Models 132
APA Sample Pages 137
IEEE Documentation 139
IEEE In-TextCitations 139
IEEE Documentation Models 139
IEEE Sample Pages 143
MLA Documentation 145
MLA In-TextCitations 145
MLA Documentation Models 145
MLA Sample Pages 151
Documenting sources achieves three important purposes:
• It allows readers to locate and consult the sources used and to find
further information on the subject.

=== Page 163 ===
6860_ch0D.qxp 10/24/09 9:22 AM Page 130
130 documenting sources
• It enables writers to support their assertions and arguments in such
documents as proposals, reports, and trade journal articles.
• It helps writers to give proper credit to others and thus avoid
plagiarismby identifying the sources of facts, ideas, visuals,
D quotations, and paraphrases. See also paraphrasing.
This entry shows citation models and sample pages for three principal
documentation systems: APA, IEEE, and MLA. The following examples
compare these three styles for citing a book by one author: Project
Management in New Product Developmentby Bruce T. Barkley, which
was published in 2007 by McGraw-Hill in New York, New York.
• The American Psychological Association (APA) system of citation
is often used in the social sciences. It is referred to as an author-
date method of documentation because parenthetical in-text
citations and a reference list (at the end of the paper) in APA style
emphasize the author(s) and date of publication so that the cur-
rency of the research is clear.
APA IN-TEXT CITATION
(Author’s LastName,Year)
(Barkley,2007)
APA REFERENCES ENTRY
Author’s LastName,Initials.(Year).Title in italics.City,State
(abbreviated) or Country of Publication:Publisher.
Barkley,B.T.(2007).Projectmanagementin new product
development.New York,NY:McGraw-Hill.
• The system set forth in the IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Elec-
tronics Engineers, Inc.) Standards Style Manualis often used for
the production of technical documents and standards in areas
ranging from computer engineering, biomedical technology, and
telecommunications to electric power, aerospace, and consumer
electronics. The IEEE system is referred to as a number-style
method of documentation because bibliographical reference
numbers and a numbered bibliography identify the sources of
information.
IEEE IN-TEXT CITATION
[Bibliographical reference number corresponding to a bibliography
entry]
[B1]

=== Page 164 ===
6860_ch0D.qxp 10/30/09 7:16 AM Page 131
documenting sources 131
IEEE BIBLIOGRAPHY ENTRY
[Bibliographical reference number] Author’s LastName,Firstand
Middle Initial (or Full FirstName),Title in Italics.Place of
Publication:Publisher,Date of Publication,Pages.
D
[B1] Barkley,B.T.,ProjectManagementin New ProductDevelopment.
New York:McGraw-Hill,2007,pp.112–125.
• The Modern Language Association (MLA) system is used in litera-
ture and the humanities. MLA style uses parenthetical in-text
citations and a list of works cited, and it places greater importance
on the pages on which cited information can be found than on the
publication date.
MLA IN-TEXT CITATION
(Author’s LastName Page Number)
(Barkley 162)
MLA WORKS-CITED ENTRY
Author’s LastName,FirstName.Title Italicized.Place of Publication:
Publisher,Date of Publication.Medium of publication.
Barkley,Bruce T.ProjectManagementin New ProductDevelopment.
New York:McGraw,2007.Print.
These systems are described in full detail in the following style manuals:
American Psychological Association. Publication Manual of the
American Psychological Association. 6th ed. Washington:
APA, 2010. See also www.apastyle.org.
IEEE Standards Style Manual. 2007 ed. New York: IEEE, 2007.
See also http://standards.ieee.org/guides/style.
MLA Handbook for Writers of Research Papers. 7th ed. New
York: MLA, 2009. See also www.mlahandbook.org.
For additional bibliographic advice and documentation models for
types of sources not included in this entry, consult these style manuals
or those listed in “Web Link: Other Style Manuals and Documentation
Systems” on page 153. See also bibliographiesand research.

=== Page 165 ===
6860_ch0D.qxp 10/24/09 9:22 AM Page 132
132 documenting sources
APA Documentation
APA In-Text Citations. Within the text of a paper, APA parenthetical
documentation gives a brief citation—in parentheses—of the author,
year of publication, and a relevant page number if it helps locate a pas-
D
sage in a lengthy document.
(cid:2) Technology has the potential to produce a transformational impact
APA
on human life that will enable the human brain to reach beyond its
current limitations (Kurzweil, 2006).
(cid:2) According to Kurzweil (2006), we will witness a “pace of techno-
logical change that will be so rapid, its impact so deep, that human
life will be irreversibly transformed” (p. 7).
When APA parenthetical citations are needed midsentence, place
them after the closing quotation marks and continue with the rest of the
sentence.
(cid:2) In short, “the Singularity”( Kurzweil, 2006, p. 9)is a blending of
human biology and technology that will help us develop beyond
our human limitations.
If the APA parenthetical citation follows a block quotation, place it
after the final punctuation mark.
(cid:2) ...a close collaboration with the nursing staff and the hospital
bed safety committee is essential. (Jackson, 2008)
When a work has two authors, cite both names joined by an am-
persand: (Hinduja & Nguyen, 2008). For the first citation of a work
with three to six authors, include all names. For subsequent citations
and for works with more than six authors, include only the last name of
the first author followed by et al. (not italicized and with a period after
al.). When two or more works by different authors are cited in the same
parentheses, list the citations alphabetically and use semicolons to sepa-
rate them: (Hinduja & Nguyen, 2008; Townsend, 2007).
APA Documentation Models. In reference lists, APA requires that the
first word of book and article titles be capitalized and all subsequent
words be lowercased. Exceptions include the first word after a colon or
dash and proper nouns.
PRINTED BOOKS
Single Author
Taleb,N.N.(2007).The black swan:The impactof the highly
improbable.New York,NY:Random House.

=== Page 166 ===
6860_ch0D.qxp 10/24/09 9:22 AM Page 133
documenting sources 133
Multiple Authors
Jones,E.,Haenfler,R.,& Johnson,B.(2007).Better world handbook:
Small changes thatmake a big difference. Gabriola Island,British
Columbia,Canada:New Society.
D
Multiple Books by Same Author
List the works in chronological order.
APA
Gawande,A.(2002).Complications:A surgeon’s notes on an imperfect
science.New York,NY:Picador.
Gawande,A.(2007).Better:A surgeon’s notes on performance.New
York,NY:Picador.
Corporate Author
MicrosoftCorporation.(2007).Windows Vista:The new experience.
Redmond,WA:MicrosoftPress.
Edition Other Than First
Kouzes,J.M.,& Posner,B.Z.(2007).The leadership challenge(4th ed.).
New York,NY:Wiley.
Multivolume Work
Knuth,D.E.(1998).The Artof Computer Programming(Vols.1–3).
Reading,MA:Addison-Wesley.
Work in an Edited Collection
Sen,A.(2007).Education and standards of living.In R.Curren (Ed.),
Philosophy of education:An anthology(pp.95–101).Malden,MA:
Blackwell.
Encyclopedia or Dictionary Entry
Gibbard,B.G.(2007).Particle detector.In World Book encyclopedia
(Vol.15,pp.202–203).Chicago,IL:World Book.
ARTICLES IN PRINTED PERIODICALS
Magazine Article
Austen,B.(2009,August).End of the road:After Detroit,the wreck of
an American dream.Harper’s Magazine,317(8),26–36.
Journal Article
Valentine,S.,& Fleischman,G.(2008).Ethics programs,perceived
corporate social responsibility and job satisfaction.Journal of
Business Ethics,77,159–172.

=== Page 167 ===
6860_ch0D.qxp 10/28/09 7:37 AM Page 134
134 documenting sources
Article with an Unknown Author
Plantgenome organization.(2008).Science 320,498–501.
Newspaper Article
D
Chazan,G.(2007,November 29).Can wind power find footing in the
deep? Wall StreetJournal,p.B1.
APA
ELECTRONIC SOURCES
Entire Web Site
The APA recommends that, at minimum, a reference to a Web site
should provide an author (whenever possible), the date of publica-
tion or update (use “(n.d.)” if no date is available), the title, and an
address (URL) that links directly to the document or section. If the
content could change or be deleted, such as on a Web site, include
the retrieval date also. (The retrieval date is not necessary for con-
tent with a fixed publication date, such as a journal article.) On the
rare occasion that you need to cite multiple pages of a Web site (or
the entire site), provide a URL that links to the site’s homepage. No
periods follow URLs.
Society for Technical Communication.(2008).Retrieved from
http://www.stc.org
Online Book
Use this form for books made available online or for e-books.
Sowell,T.(2007).Basic economics:A common sense guide to the
economy(3rd ed.).Retrieved from http://books.google.com/
ShortWork from a Web Site,with an Author
DuVander,A.(2006,June 29).Cookies make the Web go ’round.
Retrieved from http://www.webmonkey.com/webmonkey/
06/26/index3a.html
ShortWork from a Web Site,with a Corporate or an Organizational Author
General Motors.(2007).Company profile.Retrieved from
http://www.gm.com/corporate/about/company.jsp
ShortWork from a Web Site,with an Unknown Author
Timeline:Alaska pipeline chronology.(2006,April 4).Retrieved from
http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/amex/pipeline/timeline/index.html

=== Page 168 ===
6860_ch0D.qxp 10/30/09 8:41 AM Page 135
documenting sources 135
Article or Other Work from a Database
Gaston,N.,& Kishi,T.(2007).Part-time workers doing full-time work
in Japan.Journal of the Japanese and International Economies,
21,434–454.doi:10.1016/j.jjie.2006.04.001
D
Article in an Online Periodical,NotAvailable in Print
Gruener,W.(2008,April 1).Intel fires up new Atom processors.TG
APA
Daily.Retrieved from http://www.tgdaily.com/content/view/
36735/135/
Article Posted on a Wiki
Datastream guides.(2007,June 5).Biz Wiki. Retrieved May 6,2008,
from http://www.library.ohiou.edu/subjects/bizwiki/
index.php/Datastream_Guides
E-mail Message
E-mail messages are not cited in an APA reference list. They can be
cited in the text as follows: “According to J. D. Kahl (personal
communication, October 2, 2007), Web pages need to reflect....”
Online Posting (Lists,Forums,Discussion Boards)
Harris,S.(2007,December 5).Camera manual comments [Online
forum comment].Retrieved from http://www.techwr-l.com/
techwhirl/
Blog Entry
Gwozdz,G.L.(2005,December 5).Deductibility of 529 plans [Web log
post].Retrieved from http://glgcpa.blogspot.com/
Publication on CD-ROM
Tapscott,D.,& Williams,A.D.(2007).Wikinomics:How mass
collaboration changes everything[CD-ROM].Old Saybrook,CT:
Tantor.
MULTIMEDIA SOURCES (ELECTRONIC AND PRINT)
Film,Video,or Podcast
Tracy,B.(Host),& Jeffreys,M.(2007).Doubling your productivity
[DVD].Waterford,MI:Seminars on DVD.
Iowa Public Television.(2007,December 12).National debtimpact
on national security [Video file].Retrieved from http://www
.youtube.com/watch?v=hW1UCvqWY2E

=== Page 169 ===
6860_ch0D.qxp 10/24/09 9:22 AM Page 136
136 documenting sources
Radio or Television Program
Vigeland,T.(Host).(2007,December 5).Plug-in hybrids need more
juice.Marketplace[Radio broadcast].Los Angeles,CA:American
Public Media.Retrieved from http://marketplace.publicradio
D .org/display/web/2007/12/05/plug_in_cars/
Kurzweil,R.(2006,November 5).In Depth:Ray Kurzweil.In Depth
APA [Television broadcast].Washington,DC:C-Span.
OTHER SOURCES
Visual from Secondary Source
The APA recommends citing the source in which the visual (table
or figure) appeared, without mentioning the visual specifically in
the reference list. The in-text citation should include a source line
(Source: author’s last name, year, page number) placed directly
below the visual. See also visualsand Ethics Note on page 153.
Published Interview
Pitney,J.(2008,January).Q & A [Interview].Automobile,22(1),66.
Personal Communications
Personal communications such as lectures, letters, interviews, and
e-mail messages are generally not cited in an APA reference list.
They can be cited in the text as follows: “According to J. D. Kahl
(personal communication, October 2, 2007), Web pages need to
reflect....”
Brochure or Pamphlet
Library of Congress,U.S.CopyrightOffice.(2007).Copyrightbasics
[Brochure].Washington,DC:U.S.GovernmentPrinting Office.
GovernmentDocument
U.S.Departmentof Labor,Bureau of Labor Statistics.(2007).National
census of fatal occupational injuries in 2006(ReportNo.USDL
07-1202).Washington,DC:U.S.Departmentof Labor.
Report
Ditch,W.(2007).XML-based office documentstandards.Bristol,
England:Higher Education Funding Council for England.
Unpublished Data
Garcia,A.(2008).[Ohio information technology resources,by county].
Unpublished raw data.

=== Page 170 ===
6860_ch0D.qxp 10/24/09 9:22 AM Page 137
documenting sources 137
APA Sample Pages
Short-
ened title ETHICS CASES 14 D
and page
number.
This report examines the nature and disposition of the 3,458 ethics
APA
cases handled companywide by CGF’s ethics officers and managers
during 2007. The purpose of such reports is to provide the Ethics and
Business Conduct Committee with the information necessary for as-
One-inch
margins. sessing the effectiveness of the first year of CGF’s Ethics Program
Text
double- (Davis, Marks, & Tegge, 2004). According to Matthias Jonas (2004),
spaced.
recommendations are given for consideration “in planning for the sec-
ond year of the Ethics Program” (p. 152).
The Office of Ethics and Business Conduct was created to admin-
ister the Ethics Program. The director of the Office of Ethics and
Business Conduct, along with seven ethics officers throughout CGF,
was given the responsibility for the following objectives, as described
by Rossouw (2000):
Communicate the values, standards, and goals of CGF’s
Long quote Program to employees. Provide companywide channels for
indented
five to seven employee education and guidance in resolving ethics concerns.
spaces,
double- Implement companywide programs in ethics awareness and
spaced,
without recognition. Employee accessibility to ethics information and
quotation
guidance is the immediate goal of the Office of Business Con-
marks.
duct in its first year. (p. 1543)
The purpose of the Ethics Program, established by the Committee, is to
“promote ethical business conduct through open communication and
In-text compliance with company ethics standards” (Jonas, 2006, p. 89). To ac-
citation
gives complish this purpose, any ethics policy must ensure confidentiality
name,
date,and and anonymity for employees who raise genuine ethics concerns.
page
The procedure developed at CGF guarantees that employees can
number.
FIGURE D–5. APA Sample Page from Report

=== Page 171 ===
6860_ch0D.qxp 10/24/09 9:22 AM Page 138
138 documenting sources
ETHICS CASES 21
D References Heading centered.
Davis, W. C., Marks, R., & Tegge, D. (2004). Working in the
Firstword
of title capi-
APA system: Five new management principles. New York,
talized and
subsequent
NY: St. Martin’s Press.
words
lowercased.
Jonas, M. (2004). The Internet and ethical communication:
Toward a new paradigm. Journal of Ethics and
Communication, 32, 147–177.
Jonas, M. (2006). Ethics in organizational communication:
Listalpha-
betized by
A review of the literature. Journal of Ethics and
authors’
lastnames
Communication, 29, 79–99.
and
double-
National Science Foundation. (2007). Conflicts of interest and
spaced.
standards of ethical conduct. Arlington, VA: Author.
Rossouw, G. J. (2000). Business ethics in South Africa.
Journal of Business Ethics, 16, 1539–1547.
Schipper, F. (2007). Transparency and integrity: Contrary
concepts? In K. Homann, P. Koslowski, and C. Luetge
Hanging-
indent (Eds.), Globalisation and business ethics(pp.
style used
for entries. 101–118). Burlington, VT: Ashgate.
Smith, T. (Reporter), & Lehrer, J. (Host). (2006). NewsHour
business ethics anthology[DVD]. Encino, CA:
Business Training Media.
FIGURE D–6. APA Sample Listof References

=== Page 172 ===
6860ch0D.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 139
documenting sources 139
IEEE Documentation
IEEE In-TextCitations. IEEE bracketed bibliographical reference num-
bers within the text of a paper provide sequential numbers that corre-
spond to the full citation in the bibliography: [A1], [A2], etc. The letter
D
within the brackets specifies the annex, or appendix, where the bibliog-
raphy is located (Annex A, Annex B, etc.). In IEEE style, the bibliogra-
phy is always placed in an annex. Note that “Annex A” is usually IEEE
reserved for standards (or normative references), whereas “Annex B” is
reserved for typical in-text (or informative) citations.
(cid:2) As Peterson writes, preparing a videotape of measurement methods
is cost effective and can expedite training [B1].
(cid:2) The results of these studies have led even the most conservative
managers to adopt technologies that will “catapult the industry
forward” [B2].
The first bibliographic reference cited in the document should be
marked with a footnote that reads as follows.
(cid:2) 1The numbers in brackets correspond to those of the bibliography
in Annex B.
IEEE Documentation Models
BOOKS
Single Author
[B1] Taleb,N.N.,The Black Swan:The Impactof the Highly Improbable.
New York:Random House,2007,pp.165–189.
Multiple Authors
[B2] Jones,E.,Haenfler,R.,and Johnson,B.,Better World Handbook:
Small Changes ThatMake a Big Difference.Gabriola Island,BC:New
Society,2007,pp.129–142.
Corporate Author
[B3] MicrosoftCorporation,Windows Vista:The New Experience.
Redmond,WA:MicrosoftPress,2007,pp.29–44.
Edition Other Than First
[B4] Kouzes,J.M.,and Posner,B.Z.,The Leadership Challenge,4th ed.
New York:Wiley,2007,pp.221–247.
Multivolume Work
[B5] Knuth,D.E.,The Artof Computer Programming,vol.2.Reading,
MA:Addison-Wesley,1998,pp.35–51.

=== Page 173 ===
6860ch0D.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 140
140 documenting sources
Work in an Edited Collection
[B6] Sen,A.“Education and standards of living,”in Philosophy of
Education:An Anthology,R.Curren,Ed.Malden,MA:Blackwell,2007,
pp.95–101.
D
Encyclopedia or Dictionary Entry
[B7] World Book Encyclopedia,2007 ed.,s.v.“particle detector.”
IEEE
ARTICLES IN PERIODICALS (See alsoElectronic Sources)
Magazine Article
[B8] McGirt,E.,“Facebook opens up,”FastCompany,pp.54–89,Nov.
2007.
Journal Article
[B9] Valentine,S.,and Fleischman,G.,“Ethics programs,perceived
corporate social responsibility and job satisfaction,”Journal of
Business Ethics,vol.77,pp.159–172,2008.
Article with an Unknown Author
[B10] “Plantgenome organization,”Science,pp.498–501,Apr.2008.
Newspaper Article
[B11] Chazan,G.,“Can wind power find footing in the deep?”Wall
StreetJournal,sec.B,29 Nov.2007.
INTERNET SOURCES
The IEEE Standards Style Manual, 2007 ed., includes general in-
formation when citing information found on the Internet: If a doc-
ument listed in a bibliography is accessed from the Internet, the
Style Manualrecommends that the document title, date, version, or
other pertinent information should be listed, followed by a foot-
note that gives the Internet location. The URL should be the most
stable location whenever possible “to avoid inadvertent or inten-
tional changes that would affect the site name,” so you should use
the index to the page rather than the page itself.
Because the editors of the Style Manual suggest that readers
consult the Chicago Manual of Stylefor more information on how
to list various electronic and multimedia sources, the following
models are based on the guidelines set forth in the Chicago Manual
of Style, 15th ed.
Entire Web Site
[B12] Society for Technical Communication.Society for Technical
Communication.2008.[Footnote should follow with www.stc.org.]

=== Page 174 ===
6860ch0D.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 141
documenting sources 141
ShortWork from a Web Site,with an Author
[B13] DuVander,A.,“Cookies make the web go ’round.”Webmonkey.
29 June 2006.[Footnote should follow with www.webmonkey.com.]
ShortWork from a Web Site,with a Corporate Author D
[B14] General Motors.“Company Profile.”General Motors.2007.
[Footnote should follow with www.gm.com.]
IEEE
ShortWork from a Web Site,with an Unknown Author
[B15] “Timeline:Alaska pipeline chronology.”The Alaska Pipeline.
4 Apr.2006.[Footnote should follow with www.pbs.org.]
Article or Other Work from a Database
[B16] Gaston,N.,and Kishi,T.,“Part-time workers doing full-time
work in Japan.”Journal of the Japanese and International Economies.
21 (2007):435–454.[Footnote should follow with search.ebscohost
.com.]
Article in an Online Periodical
[B17] Gruener,W.,“Intel fires up new Atom processor.”TG Daily
29 Apr.2008.[Footnote should follow with www.tgdaily.com.]
MULTIMEDIA SOURCES (Printand Electronic)
Map or Chart
[B18] Middle East.Map.Chicago:Rand,2007.
Film or Video
[B19] “Doubling Your Productivity.”Seminars on DVD.Hosted by Brian
Tracy,directed by Michael Jeffreys.Waterford,MI,2007.
Television Interview
[B20] Khazaee,M.,Interview by Charlie Rose.The Charlie Rose Show.
Public Broadcasting System,6 Dec.2007.
OTHER SOURCES
E-mail
The IEEE Standards Style Manual does not provide advice for cit-
ing personal communications such as conversations, letters, and
e-mail; the Chicago Manual of Style, 15th edition, suggests that
personal communications are usually cited in the text rather than
listed in a bibliography.
Published Interview
[B21] Pitney,J.,“Q & A,”Interview.Automobile,p.66,Jan.2008.

=== Page 175 ===
6860ch0D.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 142
142 documenting sources
Personal Interview
[B22] Andersen,E.,Interview by author.Tape recording.San Jose,CA,
29 Nov.2007.
D Personal Letter
Personal communications such as letters, e-mail, and messages
from discussion groups and electronic bulletin boards are not cited
IEEE
in an IEEE bibliography.
Brochure or Pamphlet
[B23] Library of Congress,U.S.CopyrightOffice,CopyrightBasics.
Washington,DC:GPO,2007,pp.1–3.
GovernmentDocument
[B24] U.S.Departmentof Labor,Bureau of Labor Statistics,National
census of fatal occupational injuries in 2006.Washington,DC:U.S.
Departmentof Labor,2007.
Report
[B25] Ditch,W.,XML-Based Office DocumentStandards.Bristol,England:
Higher Education Funding Council for England,2007.

=== Page 176 ===
6860ch0D.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 143
documenting sources 143
IEEE Sample Pages
Standards in Business, June 2008 D
One-inch This report examines the nature and disposition of the 3,458 ethics
margins, cases handled companywide by CGF’s ethics officers and man- IEEE
single- agers during 2007. The purpose of such reports is to provide the
spaced. Ethics and Business Conduct Committee with the information nec- Shortened
title and
essary for assessing the effectiveness of the first year of CGF’s
date.
Ethics Program. According to Matthias Jonas, recommendations
are given for consideration “in planning for the second year of the
Ethics Program” [B1].1
The Office of Ethics and Business Conduct was created to admin-
ister the Ethics Program. The director of the Office of Ethics and
Business Conduct was given the responsibility for the following
objectives, as described by Rossouw:
Long quote Communicate the values, standards, and goals of CGF’s Program to
indented,set employees. Provide companywide channels for employee education
in smaller font and guidance in resolving ethics concerns. Implement company-
size,without wide programs in ethics awareness and recognition. Employee
quotation accessibility to ethics information and guidance is the immediate
marks. goal of the Office of Business Conduct in its first year [B2].
The purpose of the Ethics Program, according to Jonas, is to “pro-
mote ethical business conduct through open communication and
compliance with company ethics standards” [B3].
Block Major ethics cases were defined as those situations potentially in-
paragraphs. volving serious violations of company policies or illegal conduct.
Examples of major ethics cases included cover-up of defective
workmanship or use of defective parts in products; discrimination
in hiring and promotion; involvement in monetary or other kick-
backs; sexual harassment; disclosure of proprietary or company
information; theft; and use of corporate Internet resources for inap-
propriate purposes, such as conducting personal business,
gambling, or access to pornography.
The effectiveness of CGF’s Ethics Program during the first year of
implementation is most evidenced by (1) the active participation of
employees in the program and the 3,458 contacts employees made
regarding ethics concerns through the various channels available to
them, and (2) the action taken in the cases reported by employees,
Footnote 1The numbers in brackets correspond to those in the bibliography
explains in Annex B. Page number
firstin-text atbottom
citation. 14 rightof page,
one space
below last
line.
FIGURE D–7. IEEE Sample Page from Report

=== Page 177 ===
6860ch0D.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 144
144 documenting sources
Standards in Business, June 2008
D Annex B Bibliography
labeled “infor-
(informative) mative”in
14-point
IEEE
Bibliography type within
parentheses.
[B1] Jonas, M., “The internet and ethical communication: Toward
Title in
bold; a new paradigm,” Journal of Ethics and Communication, vol. 32,
16-point pp. 147–177, Fall 2004.
type.
[B2] Rossouw, G. J., “Business ethics in South Africa,” Journal
of Business Ethics, vol. 16, pp. 1539–1547, 1997.
Listin order [B3] Jonas, M., “Ethics in organizational communication: A
of appear- review of the literature,” Journal of Ethics and Communication,
ance in vol. 29, pp. 77–99, Summer 2006.
document.
[B4] Davis, W. C., Marks, R., and Tegge, D., Working in the
System: Five New Management Principles. New York: St.
Martin’s, 2001, pp. 18–42.
Single- [B5] Schipper, F., “Transparency and integrity: Contrary
spaced concepts?” in Globalisation and Business Ethics, Karl Homann,
block Peter Koslowski, and Christoph Luetge, Eds. Burlington, VT:
entries. Ashgate, 2007, pp. 101–118.
[B6] Sariolgholam, M., Interview by author. Tape recording.
Berkeley, CA, 29 Jan. 2008.
[B7] United States. National Science Foundation, Conflicts of
Interest and Standards of Ethical Conduct. Arlington, VA:
National Science Foundation, 2007, pp. 1–10.
[B8] International Business Ethics Institute. International Business
Ethics Institute.*
[B9] NewsHour Business Ethics Anthology. DVD. Hosted by Jim
Lehrer. Business Training Media, Encino, CA, 2006.
*Available at www.business-ethics.org.
20
FIGURE D–8. IEEE Sample Bibliography

=== Page 178 ===
10996_ch0D.qxp 7/8/09 1:03 PM Page 145
documenting sources 145
MLA Documentation
MLA In-TextCitations. The MLA parenthetical citation within the text
of a paper gives a brief citation—in parentheses—of the author and
relevant page numbers, separated only by a space. When citing Web
D
sites where no author or page reference is available, provide a short title
of the work in parentheses.
MLA
(cid:2) We will witness a “pace of technological change that will be so
rapid, its impact so deep, that human life will be irreversibly trans-
formed”(Kurzweil 7).
(cid:2) Kurzweil predicts that technology has the potential to produce a
transformational impact on human life that will enable the human
brain to reach beyond its current limitations (7).
[If the author is cited in the text, include only the page number(s)
in parentheses.]
(cid:2) In 1810, Peter Durand invented the can, which was later used to
provide soldiers and explorers canned rations and ultimately
“saved legions from sure starvation” (“Forgotten Inventors”).
If the parenthetical citation refers to a long, indented quotation, place it
outside the punctuation of the last sentence.
(cid:2) ...a close collaboration with the nursing staff and the hospital
bed safety committee is essential. (Jackson 208)
If no author is named or if you are using more than one work by the
same author, give a shortened version of the title in the parenthetical ci-
tation, unless you name the title in the text (a “signal phrase”). A cita-
tion for Quint Studer’s book Results That Last: Hardwiring Behaviors
That Will Take Your Company to the Top would appear as (Studer, Re-
sults93).
MLA Documentation Models
PRINTED BOOKS
Single Author
Taleb,Nassim Nicholas.The Black Swan:The Impactof the Highly
Improbable.New York:Random,2007.Print.
Multiple Authors
Jones,Ellis,Ross Haenfler,and BrettJohnson.Better World Handbook:
Small Changes ThatMake a Big Difference.Gabriola Island,BC:
New Society,2007.Print.

=== Page 179 ===
10996_ch0D.qxp 7/22/09 7:13 AM Page 146
146 documenting sources
Multiple Books by Same Author
List the works in alphabetical order by title.
Gawande,Atul.Better:A Surgeon’s Notes on Performance.New York:
D Picador,2007.Print.
---.Complications:A Surgeon’s Notes on an ImperfectScience.New
MLA York:Picador,2002.Print.
Corporate Author
MicrosoftCorporation.Windows Vista:The New Experience.Redmond:
MicrosoftPress,2007.Print.
Edition Other Than First
Kouzes,James M.,and Barry Z.Posner.The Leadership Challenge.4th
ed.New York:Wiley,2007.Print.
Multivolume Work
Knuth,Donald E.The Artof Computer Programming.3 vols.Reading,
MA:Addison-Wesley,1998.Print.
Work in an Edited Collection
Sen,Amartya.“Education and Standards of Living.”Philosophy of
Education:An Anthology.Ed.Randall Curren.Malden:Blackwell,
2007.95-101.Print.
Encyclopedia or Dictionary Entry
Gibbard,Bruce G.“Particle Detector.”World Book Encyclopedia.
2007 ed.Print.
ARTICLES IN PRINTED PERIODICALS (See alsoElectronic Sources)
Magazine Article
McGirt,Ellen.“Facebook Opens Up.”FastCompanyNov.2007:54-89.
Print.
Journal Article
Valentine,Sean,and Gary Fleischman.“Ethics Programs,Perceived
Corporate Social Responsibility,and Job Satisfaction.”Journal of
Business Ethics77 (2008):159-72.Print.
Article with an Unknown Author
“PlantGenome Organization.”ScienceApr.2008:498-501.Print.

=== Page 180 ===
10996_ch0D.qxp 7/23/09 2:13 PM Page 147
documenting sources 147
Newspaper Article
Chazan,Guy.“Can Wind Power Find Footing in the Deep?”Wall Street
Journal29 Nov.2007:B1+.Print.
ELECTRONIC SOURCES D
Entire Web Site
The MLA recommends that a reference to a Web site should pro-
MLA
vide the author’s name (whenever possible), the title of the site
(italicized), the name of the sponsoring organization, a publication
date (posted or updated), the medium of publication (“Web”), and
a retrieval date.
Society for Technical Communication.2008.Soc.for Technical
Communication.Web.18 Mar.2008.
Online Book
Sowell,Thomas.Basic Economics:A Common Sense Guide to
the Economy.3rd ed.New York:Basic,2008.Google Book Search.
Web.12 Jan.2008.
ShortWork from a Web Site,with an Author
DuVander,Adam.“Cookies Make the Web Go ’Round.”Webmonkey.
29 June 2006.Web.20 Dec.2007.
ShortWork from a Web Site,with a Corporate or an Organizational Author
General Motors.“Company Profile.”General Motors.General Motors,
2009.Web.14 July 2009.
ShortWork from a Web Site,with an Unknown Author
“Timeline:Alaska Pipeline Chronology.”The Alaska Pipeline.PBS,4 Apr.
2006.Web.22 Mar.2008.
Article or Other Work from a Database
Gaston,Noel,and Tomoka Kishi.“Part-time Workers Doing Full-time
Work in Japan.”Journal of the Japanese and International
Economies21 (2007):435-54.Business Source Premier.Web.
25 Nov.2007.
Article in an Online Periodical
Gruener,Wolfgang.“Intel Fires Up New Atom Processors.”TG Daily.
DD&M Inc.,1 Apr.2008.Web.29 Apr.2008.

=== Page 181 ===
10996_ch0D.qxp 7/23/09 2:13 PM Page 148
148 documenting sources
Article Posted on a Wiki
“Datastream Guides.”Article posted to wiki.The Biz Wiki.Ohio
University Libraries,5 June 2007.Web.6 May 2008.
D
E-mail Message
Kalil,Ari.“Technical SupportSurvey.”Message to the author.12 Jan.
MLA 2008.E-mail.
Online Posting (Lists,Forums,Discussion Boards)
Harris,Sandy.“Camera Manual Comments.”TECHWR-L.5 Dec.2007.
Web.8 Feb.2008.
Blog Entry
Ojala,Marydee.“EPA Comes to SLA.”Infotoday Blog.7 June 2007.Web.
12 Sept.2007.
Publication on CD-ROM
Tapscott,Don,and Anthony D.Williams.“Wikinomics.”Wikinomics:
How Mass Collaboration Changes Everything.Old Saybrook:
Tantor,2007.CD-ROM.
MULTIMEDIA SOURCES (Printand Electronic)
Film,Video,or Podcast
Doubling Your Productivity.Perf.Brian Tracy.Dir.Michael Jeffreys.
Waterford:Seminars on DVD,2007.DVD.
“National DebtImpacton National Security.”Des Moines Register
Republican Presidential Debate.Iowa Public Television.12 Dec.
2007.Iptv.org.Web.13 Dec.2007.
Radio or Television Program
“Plug-in Hybrids Need More Juice.”Marketplace.HostTess Vigeland.
American Public Media,5 Dec.2007.Web.11 Feb.2008.
“In Depth:Ray Kurzweil.”In Depth.HostPedro Echevarria.C-Span.
5 Nov.2006.Television.
Television Interview
Khazaee,Mohammad.Interview by Charlie Rose.The Charlie Rose
Show.PBS.WNET,New York,6 Dec.2007.Television.

=== Page 182 ===
10996_ch0D.qxp 7/8/09 1:03 PM Page 149
documenting sources 149
OTHER SOURCES
Visual from a Secondary Source
Tables and figures (graphs, charts, maps, photographs, and drawings)
are classified as visuals in MLA style. Cite the artist or author (if
available), title of visual, type of visual, the original publication date D
(if available), and the institution where it is located (if applicable).
Follow with identifying information about the source in which the
MLA
visual appeared. See also visuals.
Source:Jo Mackiewicz,“Compliments and Criticisms in Book Reviews
aboutBusiness Communication.”Journal of Business and Technical
Communication21.2 (2007):205.Print.
Mackiewicz,Jo.“Criticism Mitigation Strategies.”Chart.“Compliments
and Criticisms in Book Reviews aboutBusiness Communication.”
Journal of Business and Technical Communication21.2 (2007):
205.[Citation from printsource.]
“Global Warming Effects.”Map.National Geographic.Apr.2007.22
Jan.2008.[Citation from Web.]
See also Ethics Note on page 153.
Interview
Pitney,Jack.“Q & A.”Interview.AutomobileJan.2008:66.Print.
Personal Interview
Andersen,Elizabeth.Personal interview.29 Nov.2007.
Personal Letter
Pascatore,Monica.Letter to the author.10 Apr.2008.TS.
Brochure or Pamphlet
Library of Congress.US CopyrightOffice.CopyrightBasics.
Washington:GPO,2007.Print.
GovernmentDocument
United States.Dept.of Labor.Bureau of Labor Statistics.National
Census of Fatal Occupational Injuries in 2006.Rept.No.USDL
07-1202.Washington:US Dept.of Labor,2007.Print.
Report
Ditch,Walter.XML-Based Office DocumentStandards.Bristol,Eng.:
Higher Educ.Funding Council for England,2007.Print.

=== Page 183 ===
10996_ch0D.qxp 7/8/09 1:03 PM Page 150
150 documenting sources
Lecture or Speech
Nicholas,Ilene M.DemarestHall,Hobartand William Smith Colls.,
Geneva,NY.3 May 2008.Lecture.
D Yaden,Ryan.“Evolving Architecture around the Globe.”Boston Soc.of
Architects Lecture Series.Boston Public Lib.28 May 2008.Lecture.
MLA

=== Page 184 ===
6860ch0D.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 151
documenting sources 151
MLA Sample Pages
Author’s
lastname Litzinger 14 D
and page
number.
This report examines the nature and disposition of the 3,458 ethics MLA
cases handled companywide by CGF’s ethics officers and managers
during 2007. The purpose of such reports is to provide the Ethics
One-inch and Business Conduct Committee with the information necessary
margins.
Text for assessing the effectiveness of the first year of CGF’s Ethics Pro-
double-
spaced. gram (Davis, Marks, and Tegge 142). According to Matthias Jonas,
recommendations are given for consideration “in planning for the
second year of the Ethics Program” (“Internet” 152).
The Office of Ethics and Business Conduct was created to admin-
ister the Ethics Program. The director of the Office of Ethics and
Business Conduct, along with seven ethics officers throughout CGF,
was given the responsibility for the following objectives, as described
by Rossouw:
Long quote in- Communicate the values, standards, and goals of CGF’s
dented one inch
(or 10 spaces), Program to employees. Provide companywide channels
double-spaced,
withoutquota- for employee education and guidance in resolving ethics
tion marks.
concerns. Implement companywide programs in ethics
awareness and recognition. Employee accessibility to
ethics information and guidance is the immediate goal
of the Office of Business Conduct in its first year. (1543) In-textcita-
tions give
The purpose of the Ethics Program, according to Jonas, is to “promote author name
and page
ethical business conduct through open communication and compliance number.Title
used when
with company ethics standards” (“Ethics” 89). To accomplish this multiple
works by
purpose, any ethics policy must ensure confidentiality for anyone same author
cited.
FIGURE D–9. MLA Sample Page from Report

=== Page 185 ===
10996_ch0D.qxp 7/21/09 2:28 PM Page 152
152 documenting sources
Litzinger 21
Heading Works Cited
D centered.
Davis, W. C., Roland Marks, and Diane Tegge. Working in the
MLA System: Five New Management Principles. New York:
St. Martin’s, 2004. Print.
Listalpha- International Business Ethics Institute. 2007. Inter. Business Ethics
betized by
authors’ Inst., 14 Jan. 2008. Web. 19 June 2008.
lastnames
or title and Jonas, Matthias. “Ethics in Organizational Communication:
double-
spaced. A Review of the Literature.” Journal of Ethics and
Communication29 (2006): 79-99. Print.
---. “The Internet and Ethical Communication: Toward a New
Hanging- Paradigm.” Journal of Ethics and Communication32 (2004):
indentstyle
used for 147-77. Print.
entries.
Rossouw, George J. “Business Ethics in South Africa.” Journal of
Business Ethics16 (2000): 1539-47. Print.
Sariolgholam, Mahmood. Personal interview. 29 Jan. 2008.
Schipper, Fritz. “Transparency and Integrity: Contrary Concepts?”
Globalisation and Business Ethics. Ed. Karl Homann, Peter
Koslowski, and Christoph Luetge. Burlington: Ashgate, 2007.
101-18. Print.
Smith, Terence. “Legislating Ethics.” NewsHour Business Ethics
Anthology. Host Jim Lehrer. Encino: Business
Training Media, 2006. DVD.
United States. Natl. Science Foundation. Conflicts of Interest
and Standards of Ethical Conduct. NSF Manual No. 15.
Arlington: Natl. Science Foundation, 2007. Print.
FIGURE D–10. MLA Sample Listof Works Cited

=== Page 186 ===
6860ch0D.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 153
double negatives 153
ETHICS NOTE Visuals under copyright require permission from copy-
right owners before they can be reproduced. Contact the publisher to
find out what needs permission, how best to obtain it, and what infor-
mation copyright owners require in source lines and reference entries.
Source lines almost always require mention of permission from the D
copyright owner to reproduce. ✦
WEB LINK Other Style Manuals and Documentation Systems
Many professional societies,publishing companies,and other organiza-
tions publish manuals thatprescribe bibliographic reference formats
for their publications or for publications in their fields.For example,
the American Medical Association (AMA) publishes the American Med-
ical Association Manual of Style.For links to style manuals and other
documentation resources,see bedfordstmartins.com/alredtechand
selectLinks for Handbook Entries.
double negatives
A double negative is the use of an additional negative word to reinforce
an expression that is already negative. In writing and speech, avoid
such constructions.
UNCLEAR We don’t have none.
[This sentence literally means that we have some.]
CLEAR We have none.
Barely, hardly, and scarcely cause problems because writers sometimes
do not recognize that those words are already negative.
s
(cid:2) The corporate policy doesn’thardly coverthe problem.
^
Not unfriendly, not without, and similar constructions are not double
negatives because in such constructions two negatives are meant to sug-
gest the gray area between negative and positive meanings. Be careful
how you use such constructions; they can be confusing to the reader
and should be used only if they serve a purpose.
(cid:2) He is not unfriendly.
[He is neither hostile nor friendly.]
(cid:2) It is not withoutregret that I offer my resignation.
[I have mixed feelings rather than only regret.]

=== Page 187 ===
6860ch0D.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 154
154 drawings
The correlative conjunctions neither and nor may appear together in a
clause without creating a double negative, so long as the writer does not
attempt to use the word notin the same clause.
neither,
D
(cid:2) It was not,as a matter of fact, neitherhis duty nor his desire to
^
dismiss the employee.
either or
(cid:2) It was not, as a matter of fact, neitherhis duty norhis desire to
^ ^
dismiss the employee.
cared noticed
(cid:2) She did notneither careabout nor noticethe error.
^ ^
Negative forms are full of traps that often entice writers into logic
errors, as illustrated in the following example:
ILLOGICAL The book reveals nothingthat has notalready been
published in some form, but some of it is, I believe, rel-
atively unknown.
In this sentence, “some of it” logically can refer only to “nothing that
has notalready been published.” The sentence can be corrected by stat-
ing the idea in more positive writing.
LOGICAL Everything in the book has been published in some
form, but some of it is, I believe, relatively unknown.
drawings
A drawing can show an object’s appearance and illustrate the steps in
procedures or instructions. It can emphasize the significant parts or
functions of a device or product, omit what is not significant, and focus
on details or relationships that a photograph cannot reveal. Think
about your need for drawings during your preparationand research. In-
clude them in your outline, indicating approximately where each should
appear throughout the outline with “drawing of...” enclosed in brack-
ets. For advice on integrating drawings into your text, see outliningand
visuals.
The types of drawings discussed in this entry are conventional line
drawings, exploded-view drawings, cutaway drawings, schematic dia-
grams, and clip-art images.

=== Page 188 ===
6860ch0D.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 155
drawings 155
A conventional line drawing is appropriate if your audience needs
an overview of a series of steps or an understanding of an object’s ap-
pearance or construction, as in Figure D–11.
An exploded-view drawing, like that in Figure D–12, can be useful
when you need to show the proper sequence in which parts fit together D
or to show the details of individual parts. Figure D–12 shows owners of
a Xerox machine how to safely unpack the machine and its key parts.
A cutaway drawing, like the one in Figure D–13, can be useful
when you need to show the internal parts of a device or structure and
illustrate their relationship to the whole.
Schematic diagrams (or schematics) are drawings that portray the
operation of electrical and mechanical systems, using lines and symbols
rather than physical likenesses. Schematics are useful in instructions or
descriptions—for example, when you need to emphasize the relation-
ships among parts without giving their precise proportions.
The schematic diagram in Figure D–14 depicts the process of trap-
ping particulates from coal-fired power plants. Note that the particulate
filter is depicted both symbolically and as an enlarged drawing to show
relevant structural details. Schematic symbols generally represent equip-
ment, gauges, and electrical or electronic components.
If you need only general-interest images to illustrate newsletters
and brochuresor to create presentationslides, use noncopyrighted clip-
art drawings from your word-processing program or from thousands of
noncopyrighted Web and library sources. Figure D–15 shows examples
of clip-art images.
ETHICS NOTE Do not use drawings from copyrighted sources without
permission and proper documentation, especially from the Web—the
same copyright laws that apply to printed material also apply to Web-
based graphics. See also copyright, documenting sources, and plagia-
rism. ✦
FIGURED–11. Conventional Line Drawing Illustrating Instructions

=== Page 189 ===
6860ch0D.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 156
156 drawings
D
Figure D–12. Exploded-View Drawing

=== Page 190 ===
6860ch0D.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 157
drawings 157
Sealed chamber
Disk platters
Head arm
D
Head actuator
Bezel
Drive electronics PCB
Mounting chassis Head electronics
Read/write head Antivibration mount
FIGURED–13. Cutaway Drawing
WRITER’S CHECKLIST Creating and Using Drawings
(cid:3)
Selectthe type of drawing based on your purposeand on whatyour
readers mightneed or expect.
(cid:3)
Seek the help of graphics specialists for drawings thatrequire a high
degree of accuracy and precision.
(cid:3)
Show equipmentand other objects from the pointof view of the per-
son who will use them.
(cid:3)
When illustrating a subsystem,show its relationship to the larger sys-
tem of which itis a part.
(cid:3)
Draw the parts of an objectin proportion to one another and identify
any parts thatare enlarged or reduced.
(cid:3)
When a sequence of drawings is used to illustrate a process,arrange
them from leftto rightor from top to bottom on the page.
(cid:3)
Label parts in the drawing so thatthe textreferences to them are
clear and consistent.
(cid:3)
Depending on the complexity of whatis shown,label the parts them-
selves,as in Figure D–12,or use a key,as in Figure G–10 on page 239.

=== Page 191 ===
6860ch0D.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 158
158 drawings
D
FIGURED–14. Schematic Diagram
FIGURED–15. Clip-ArtImages

=== Page 192 ===
6860ch0D.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 159
due to / because of 159
due to / because of
Due to(meaning “caused by”) is acceptable following a linking verb.
(cid:2) His absence was due toa work-related injury. D
Due to is not acceptable, however, when it is used with a nonlinking
verb to replace because of.
because of
(cid:2) He left work due toillness.
^

=== Page 193 ===
6860ch0E.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 160
E
E
each
When each is used as a subject, it takes a singular verb or pronoun.
(“Eachof the reports isto be submitted ten weeks after itis assigned.”)
When each refers to a plural subject, it takes a plural verb or pronoun.
(“The reports each have company logos on their title pages.”) See also
agreementand conciseness.
economic / economical
Economic refers to the production, development, and management of
material wealth. (“Technology infrastructure has an economic impact
on communities.”) Economicalsimply means “not wasteful or extrava-
gant.” (“Employees should be as economical as possible in their equip-
ment purchases.”)
editing (see revision and proofreading)
e.g. / i.e.
The abbreviation e.g.stands for the Latin exempli gratia, meaning “for
example”; i.e.stands for the Latin id est, meaning “that is.” Because the
English expressions (for example and that is) are clear to all readers,
avoid the Latin e.g. and i.e. abbreviations except to save space in notes
and visuals. If you must use i.e.or e.g., do not italicize either and punc-
tuate them as follows. If i.e. or e.g.connects two independent clauses, a
semicolonshould precede it and a commashould follow it.
(cid:2) The conference reflected international viewpoints; i.e., Germans,
Italians, Japanese, Chinese, and Americans gave presentations.
If i.e. or e.g. connects a noun and an appositive, a comma should pre-
cede it and follow it.
160

=== Page 194 ===
6860ch0E.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 161
ellipses 161
(cid:2) The conference included speakers from five countries, i.e., Ger-
many, Italy, Japan, China, and the United States.
ellipses
E
An ellipsis is the omission of words from quoted material; it is indicated
by three spaced periodscalled ellipsis points(...). When you use ellipsis
points, omit original punctuation marks, unless they are necessary for
clarityor the omitted material comes at the end of a quoted sentence.
ORIGINAL TEXT “Promotional material sometimes carries a fee,
particularly in high-volume distribution to
schools, although prices for these publications are
much lower than the development costs when all
factors are considered.”
WITH OMISSION “Promotional material sometimes carries a fee...
AND ELLIPSIS although prices for these publications are much
POINTS lower than the development costs....”
Notice in the preceding example that the final period is retained and
what remains of the quotation is grammatically complete. When the
omitted part of the quotation is preceded by a period, retain the period
and add the three ellipsis points after it, as in the following example.
ORIGINAL TEXT “Of the 172 major ethics cases reported, 57
percent were found to involve unsubstantiated
concerns. Misinformation was the cause of un-
founded concerns of misconduct in 72 cases.
Forty-four cases, or 26 percent of the total cases
reported, involved incidents partly substantiated
by ethics officers as serious misconduct.”
WITH OMISSION “Of the 172 major ethics cases reported, 57
AND ELLIPSIS percent were found to involve unsubstantiated
POINTS concerns....Forty-four cases, or 26 percent of
the total cases reported, involved incidents partly
substantiated by ethics officers as serious mis-
conduct.”
Do not use ellipsis points when the beginning of a quoted sentence is
omitted. Notice in the following example that the comma is dropped to
prevent a grammatical error. See also quotations.
(cid:2) The ethics report states that “26 percent of the total cases reported
involved incidents partly substantiated by ethics officers as serious
misconduct.”

=== Page 195 ===
6860ch0E.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 162
162 e-mail
e-mail
DIRECTORY
Review and Confidentiality 162
Writer’s Checklist:Observing Workplace Netiquette 163
Design Considerations 163
E Salutations,Closings,and Signature Blocks 164
Writer’s Checklist:Managing Your E-mail and Reducing Overload 166
E-mail (or email) functions in the workplace as a medium to exchange
information and share electronic files with colleagues, clients, and cus-
tomers. Although e-mail may take the form of informal notes, you
should follow the writing strategy and style described in correspon-
dence because e-mail messages often function as business letters to
those outside organizations and memos to those within organizations.
Of course, memos and letters can also be attached to e-mails. This entry
reviews topics that are specifically related to the medium of e-mail. See
also selectingthe medium.
Review and Confidentiality
E-mail is such a quick and easy way to communicate that you need to
avoid the temptation of sending a first draft without revision. As with
all correspondence, your message should include all crucial details and
be free of grammatical or factual errors, ambiguities, or unintended im-
plications. See proofreading.
ETHICS NOTE Keep in mind that e-mail can be intercepted by someone
other than the intended recipient and that e-mail messages are never
truly deleted. Most companies back up and save all their e-mail mes-
sages and are legally entitled to monitor e-mail use. Companies can be
compelled, depending on circumstances, to provide e-mail and instant
messaginglogs in a court of law. Consider the content of all your mes-
sages in the light of these possibilities, and carefully review your text
before you click “Send.” ✦
Be especially careful when sending messages to superiors in your
organization or to people outside the organization. Spending extra time
reviewing your e-mail before you click “Send” can save you the embar-
rassment of misunderstandings caused by a careless message. One help-
ful strategy is to write the draft and revise your e-mail before filling in
the “To” line with the address of your recipient. Be careful as well to
observe the rules of netiquette (Internet + etiquette) in the Writer’s
Checklistthat follows.

=== Page 196 ===
6860ch0E.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 163
e-mail 163
WRITER’S CHECKLIST Observing Workplace Netiquette
(cid:3)
Review your organization’s policy regarding the appropriate use of
e-mail.
(cid:3)
Maintain a high level of professionalism in your use of e-mail.
• Do notforward jokes or spam,discuss office gossip,or use biased
E
language.
• Do notsend flames(e-mails thatcontain abusive,obscene,or
derogatory language) to attack someone.
• Do notuse an e-mail accountwith a clever or hobby-related ad-
dress (yogalover@gja.com);e-mail addresses based on your last
name are appropriate (jones23@gja.com).
(cid:3)
Provide a subjectline thatdescribes the topic and focus of your mes-
sage (as described on page 110 in correspondence) to help recipients
manage their e-mail.
(cid:3)
Adaptforwarded messages:revise the subjectline to reflectthe cur-
rentcontentand cutirrelevantprevious text,based on your purpose
and context.
(cid:3)
Use the “cc:”(copy) and “bcc:”(blind copy) address lines thoughtfully
and consider your organization’s practice or protocol.
(cid:3)
Include a cover (or transmittal) message for all e-mail messages with
attachments (“Attached is a copy of the reportfor your review....”).
See cover letters.
(cid:3)
Send a “courtesy response”informing someone when you need a few
days or longer to reply to a request.
(cid:3)
Do notwrite in ALL UPPERCASE LETTERS (called “shouting”) or in all
lowercase letters.
(cid:3)
Avoid e-mail abbreviations (BTW for by the way,for example) used in
personal e-mail,chatrooms,and instantmessaging.
(cid:3)
Do notuse emoticons (keyboard characters used to create sideways
faces conveying emotions) for business and professional e-mail.
Design Considerations
Some e-mail systems allow you to use typographical features, such as
various fonts and bullets. These options increase your e-mail file size
and may display unpredictably in other e-mail systems. Unless you are
sure your recipient’s software will display your formatted message cor-
rectly, set your e-mail software to send messages in “plain text” and use
alternative highlighting devices. For example, capital letters or asterisks,

=== Page 197 ===
6860ch0E.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:49 AM Page 164
164 e-mail
DIGITAL TIP
Sending an E-mail Attachment
Large files, such as graphics, slow the transmission speed of e-mail
messages,and the recipient’s software or Internetprovider may notbe
able to acceptlarge attachments.Consider using a compression soft-
E
ware utility, such as WinZip at http://winzip.com, which can reduce
the file size by 80 percentor more.Caution:Viruses can be embedded
in e-mail attachments,so regularly update your virus-scanning soft-
ware and do notopen attachments from anyone you do notknow.See
bedfordstmartins.com/alredtech and select Digital Tips, “Sending an
E-mail Attachment.”
used sparingly, can substitute for boldface, italics, and underlines as
emphasis.
(cid:2) Dr. Wilhoit’s suggestions benefit doctors AND patients.
(cid:2) Although the proposal is sound in *theory*, it will never work in
*practice*.
Intermittent underlining can replace solid underlining or italics when
referring to published works in an e-mail message.
(cid:2) My report follows the format given in _Handbook of Technical
Writing_.
If you find that you need many such substitutions, consider preparing a
document that you attach to an e-mail. Doing so will allow you to use
formatted elements, such as bulleted lists and tables, that do not trans-
mit well in e-mail messages. Keep in mind the following additional de-
sign considerations when sending e-mail:
• Break the text into short paragraphs to avoid dense blocks of text.
• Consider providing an overview at the top in a brief paragraph for
messages that run longer than a screen of text.
• Place your response to someone else’s message at the beginning (or
top) of the e-mail window so that recipients can see your response
immediately.
• When replying to a message, quote only relevant parts. If your sys-
tem does not distinguish the quoted text, note it with a
greater-than symbol (>).
Salutations,Closings,and Signature Blocks
An e-mail can function as a letter, memo, or personal note; therefore,
you must adapt your salutation and complimentary closing to your au-

=== Page 198 ===
6860ch0E.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 165
e-mail 165
dience. Unless your employer requires certain forms, use the following
guidelines:
• When e-mail functions as a traditional letter, use the standard letter
salutation (Dear Ms. Tucker:or Dear DocuformCustomer:) and
closing (Sincerely,or Best wishes,).
• When you send e-mail to individuals or small groups inside an or-
E
ganization, you may wish to adopt a more personal greeting (Dear
Andy,or Dear Project Colleagues,).
• When e-mail functions as a personal note to a friend or close col-
league, you can use an informal greeting or only a first name (Hi
Mike,or Hello Jenny,or Bill,) and a closing (Take care,or Best,).
Be aware that, in some cultures, business correspondents do not use
first names as freely as do American correspondents. See international
correspondence.
Because e-mail does not provide letterhead with standard addresses
and contact information, many companies and individual writers in-
clude signature blocks (also called signatures) at the bottom of their
messages. Signature blocks, which writers can preprogram to appear on
every e-mail they send, supply information that company letterhead
usually provides as well as appropriate links to Web sites. If your orga-
nization requires a certain format, adhere to that standard. Otherwise,
use the pattern shown in Figure E–1. For signature blocks, consider as
well the following guidelines:
• Keep line length to 60 characters or fewer to avoid unpredictable
line wraps.
• Test your signature block in plain-text e-mail systems to verify
your format.
• Use highlighting cues, such as hyphens, equal signs, and white
space, to separate the signature from the message.
• Avoid using quotations, aphorisms, proverbs, or other sayings
from popular culture, religion, or poetry in professional signatures.
================================
Daniel J.Vasquez,Publications Manager ← Name and Title
Medical Information Systems ← Departmentor Division
TechCom Corporation ← Company Name
P.O.Box 5413 Salinas,CA 93962 ← Mailing Address
Office Phone 888-229-4511 (x 341) ← Phone Number
General Office Fax 888-229-1132 ← Fax Number
www.tcc.com ← Web Address (URL)
================================
FIGUREE–1. E-mail Signature Block

=== Page 199 ===
6860ch0E.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 166
166 e-mail
DIGITAL TIP
Leaving an Away-from-Desk Message
Many e-mail systems allow you to create an away-from-desk automatic
response.Your message should inform senders when you are expected
back and,if necessary,whom they can contactin your absence.To learn
E
how to set up an automatic response, see bedfordstmartins.com/
alredtechand selectDigital Tips,“Leaving an Away-from-Desk Message.”
WRITER’S CHECKLIST Managing Your E-mail and Reducing Overload
Given the high volume of e-mail in business,you need to manage your
e-mail strategically.*
(cid:3)
Avoid becoming involved in an e-mail exchange if a phone call or
meeting would be more efficient.
(cid:3)
Consider whether an e-mail message could promptan unnecessary
response from the recipientand make clear to the recipientwhether
you expecta response.
(cid:3)
Send a copy (“cc:”) of an e-mail only when the person copied,in fact,
needs or wants the information.
(cid:3)
Review all messages on a subjectbefore responding to avoid dealing
with issues thatare no longer relevant.
(cid:3)
Setpriorities for reading e-mail by skimming sender names and sub-
jectlines as well as where you appear in a “cc:”(copy) and “bcc:”(blind
copy) address line.
(cid:3)
Check e-mail addresses before sending an e-mail and keep your ad-
dresses current.
(cid:3)
Check your in-box regularly and try to clear itby the end of each day.
(cid:3)
Learn the advanced features of your system thatcan,for example,file
messages as they arrive.
(cid:3)
Create e-mail folders using key topics and personal names to file mes-
sages.
(cid:3)
Copy yourself or save sentcopies of importante-mail messages in
your folders.
(cid:3)
Use the search command to find particular subjects and personal
names.
*For understanding the causes of e-mail overload, see Gail Fann Thomas and Cynthia
L. King, “Reconceptualizing E-mail Overload,” Journal of Business and Technical
Communication20, no. 3 (July 2006): 252–87.

=== Page 200 ===
6860ch0E.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 167
emphasis 167
Writer’s Checklist:Managing Your E-mail and Reducing Overload
(continued)
(cid:3)
Printcopies of messages or attachments thatyou need for meetings,
files,or similar purposes.
E
emphasis
Emphasis is the principle of stressing the most important ideas in your
writing. You can achieve emphasis as described below with position,
climactic order, sentence length, sentence type, active voice, repetition,
intensifiers, direct statements, long dashes, and mechanical devices.
Achieving Emphasis
Position. Place the idea in a conspicuous position. The first and last
words of a sentence, paragraph, or document stand out in readers’
minds.
(cid:2) Moon craters are important to understanding the earth’s history
because they reflect geological history.
This sentence emphasizes moon craterssimply because the term appears
at the beginning of the sentence and geological history because it is at
the end of the sentence. See also subordination.
Climactic Order. List the ideas or facts within a sentence in sequence
from least to most important, as in the following example. See also lists.
(cid:2) Over subsequent weeks the Human Resources Department worked
diligently, management showed tact and patience, and the employ-
ees demonstrated remarkable support for the policy changes.
Sentence Length. Vary sentence length strategically. A very short sen-
tence that follows a very long sentence or a series of long sentences
stands out in the reader’s mind, as in the short sentence (“We must raise
our standards”) that ends the following paragraph. See sentence con-
struction.
(cid:2) We have already reviewed the problem the quality-control depart-
ment has experienced during the past year. We could continue to
examine the causes of our problems and point an accusing finger at
all the culprits beyond our control, but in the end it all leads to one
simple conclusion. We must raise our standards.

=== Page 201 ===
6860ch0E.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 168
168 emphasis
Sentence Type. Vary sentences by using a compound sentence, a com-
plex sentence, or a simple sentence. See sentence variety.
(cid:2) The report submitted by the committee was carefully illustrated,
and it covered five pages of single-spaced copy.
[This compound sentence carries no special emphasis; it contains
two coordinate independent clauses.]
E
(cid:2) The committee’s report, which was carefully illustrated, covered
five pages of single-spaced copy.
[This complex sentence emphasizes the size of the report.]
(cid:2) The carefully illustrated report submitted by the committee
covered five pages of single-spaced copy.
[This simple sentence emphasizes that the report was carefully
illustrated.]
Active Voice. Use the active voice to emphasize the performer of an ac-
tion: Make the performer the subject of the verb.
(cid:2) Our department designed the new system.
[This sentence emphasizes our department, which is the performer
and the subject of the verb, designed.]
Repetition. Repeat key terms, as in the use of the word remains and
the phrase comeandgoin the following sentence.
(cid:2) Similarly, atoms come and goin a molecule, but the molecule re-
mains; molecules come and goin a cell, but the cell remains; cells
come and goin a body, but the body remains; persons come and
goin an organization, but the organization remains.
—Kenneth Building, Beyond Economics
Intensifiers. Although you can use intensifiers (most, much, very) for
emphasis, this technique is so easily abused that it should be used with
caution.
(cid:2) The final proposal is muchmore persuasive than the first one.
[The intensifier muchemphasizes the contrast.]
Direct Statements. Use direct statements, such as “most important,”
“foremost,” or someone’s name in a directaddress.
(cid:2) Most important, keep in mind that everything you do affects the
company’s bottom line.
(cid:2) John, I believe we should rethink our plans.

=== Page 202 ===
6860ch0E.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 169
English as a second language 169
Long Dashes. Use a dash to call attention to a particular word or
statement.
(cid:2) The job will be done—after we are under contract.
Mechanical Devices. Use italics, bold type, underlining, and CAPITAL
LETTERS—but use them sparingly because overuse can create visual
clutter. See also capitalization, italics, and layoutand design. E
English as a second language
DIRECTORY
Countand Mass Nouns 169 PresentPerfectVerb Tense 172
Articles and Modifiers 170 PresentProgressive Verb Tense 172
Gerunds and Infinitives 171 ESL Entries 172
Adjective Clauses 171
Learning to write well in a second language takes a great deal of effort
and practice. The most effective way to improve your command of
written English is to read widely beyond the reports and professional
articles your job requires, such as magazines, newspapers, articles, nov-
els, biographies, and any other writing that interests you. In addition,
listen carefully to native speakers on television, on radio, and in person.
Do not hesitate to consult a native speaker of English, especially for im-
portant writing tasks, such as e-mails, memos, and reports. Focus on
those particular areas of English that give you trouble. See also global
communication.
Countand Mass Nouns
Count nouns refer to things that can be counted (tables, pencils, proj-
ects, reports). Mass nouns (also called noncount nouns) identify things
that cannot be counted (electricity, air, loyalty, information). This dis-
tinction can be confusing with words like electricity and water. Al-
though we can count kilowatt-hours of electricity and bottles of water,
counting becomes inappropriate when we use the words electricity and
waterin a general sense, as in “Wateris an essential resource.” Follow-
ing is a list of typical mass nouns.
anger education money technology
biology equipment news transportation
business furniture oil water
clothing health precision weather
coffee honesty research work

=== Page 203 ===
6860ch0E.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 170
170 English as a second language
The distinction between whether something can or cannot be counted
determines the form of the noun to use (singular or plural), the kind of
articlethat precedes it (a, an, the, or no article), and the kind of limiting
adjectiveit requires (such as feweror lessand muchor many). (See also
fewer / less.) Notice that count and mass nouns are always common
nouns, not proper nouns, such as the names of people.
E
Articles and Modifiers
The general rule is that every count noun must be preceded by an article
(a, an, the), a demonstrative adjective (this, that, these, those), a posses-
sive adjective (my, your, her, his, its, their), or some expression of quan-
tity (such as one, two, several, many, a few, a lot of, some, no). The
article, adjective, or expression of quantity appears either directly in
front of the noun or in front of the whole noun phrase.
(cid:2) Beth read areport last week. [article]
(cid:2) Thosereports Beth read were long. [demonstrative adjective]
(cid:2) Theirreport was long. [possessive adjective]
(cid:2) Somereports Beth read were long. [indefinite adjective]
The articles a and an are used with count nouns that refer to one item
of the whole class of like items.
(cid:2) Matthew has apen.
[Matthew could have any pen.]
The article theis used with nouns that refer to a specific item that both
the reader and the writer can identify.
(cid:2) Matthew has thepen.
[Matthew has a specific pen that is known to both the reader and
the writer.]
When making generalizations with count nouns, writers can either use
aor anwith a singular count noun or use no article with a plural count
noun. Consider the following generalization using an article.
(cid:2) Anegg is a good source of protein.
[any egg, all eggs, eggs in general]
However, the following generalization uses a plural count noun with no
article.
(cid:2) Eggsare good sources of protein.
[any egg, all eggs, eggs in general]

=== Page 204 ===
6860ch0E.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 171
English as a second language 171
When you are making a generalization with a mass noun, do not use an
article in front of the mass noun.
(cid:2) Sugaris bad for your teeth.
Gerunds and Infinitives
E
Nonnative writers of English are often puzzled by which form of a
verbal (a verb used as another part of speech) to use when it functions
as the direct object of a verb—or a complement. No structural rule ex-
ists for distinguishing between the use of an infinitive and a gerund as
the object of a verb. Any specific verb may take an infinitive as its ob-
ject, others may take a gerund, and yet others take either an infinitive or
a gerund. At times, even the base form of the verb is used.
(cid:2) He enjoys working. [gerund as a complement]
(cid:2) She promised to fulfillher part of the contract.
[infinitive as a complement]
(cid:2) The president had the manager assignher staff to another
project.
[basic verb form as a complement]
To make such distinctions accurately, rely on what you hear native
speakers use or what you read. You might also consult a reference book
for ESL students.
Adjective Clauses
Because of the variety of ways adjective clauses are constructed in dif-
ferent languages, they can be particularly troublesome for nonnative
writers of English. The following guidelines will help you form adjec-
tive clauses correctly.
Place an adjective clause directly after the noun it modifies.
.
who is standing across the room
(cid:2) The tall womanis a vice president of the company who is stand-
^ ^
ing across the room.
The adjective clause who is standing across the room modifies woman,
not company, and thus comes directly after woman.
Avoid using a relative pronoun with another pronoun in an adjec-
tive clause.
(cid:2) The man who hesits at that desk is my boss.

=== Page 205 ===
6860ch0E.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 172
172 English as a second language
PresentPerfectVerb Tense
In general, use the present perfect tense to refer to events completed in
the past that have some implication for the present.
PRESENT She has revisedthat report three times.
PERFECT [She might revise it again.]
E
When a specific time is mentioned, however, use the simple past.
SIMPLE I wrotethe letter yesterday morning.
PAST [The action, wrote, does not affect the present.]
Use the present perfect with a since or for phrase to describe actions
that began in the past and continue in the present.
(cid:2) This company has beenin business forseventeen years.
(cid:2) This company has beenin business since1990.
PresentProgressive Verb Tense
The present progressive tense is especially difficult for those whose na-
tive language does not use this tense. The present progressive tense is
used to describe some action or condition that is ongoing (or in progress)
in the present and may continue into the future.
PRESENT I am searchingfor an error in the document.
PROGRESSIVE [The search is occurring now and may continue.]
In contrast, the simple present tense more often relates to habitual ac-
tions.
SIMPLE I searchfor errors in my documents.
PRESENT [I regularly search for errors, but I am not neces-
sarily searching now.]
See ESL Tips for Using the Progressive Form in the entry tense.
ESL Entries
Most of the entries in this handbook may interest writers of English as a
second language; however, the specific entries listed in the Contents by
Topic under ESL Trouble Spots address issues that often cause problems.
WEB LINK English as a Second Language
For Web sites and electronic grammar exercises intended for speakers
of English as a second language,see bedfordstmartins.com/alredtech
and selectLinks for Handbook Entriesand Exercise Central.

=== Page 206 ===
6860ch0E.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 173
English,varieties of 173
English,varieties of
Written English includes two broad categories: standard and nonstan-
dard. Standard English is used in business, industry, government, edu-
cation, and all professions. It has rigorous and precise criteria for
capitalization, punctuation, spelling, and usage. Nonstandard English
E
does not conform to such criteria; it is often regional in origin, or it re-
flects the special usages of a particular ethnic or social group. As a re-
sult, although nonstandard English may be vigorous and colorful, its
usefulness as a means of communication is limited to certain contexts
and to people already familiar and comfortable with it in those con-
texts. It rarely appears in printed material except for special effect.
Nonstandard English is characterized by inexact or inconsistent capital-
ization, punctuation, spelling, diction, and usagechoices.
Colloquial English
Colloquial English is spoken English or writing that uses words and ex-
pressions common to casual conversation. (“We need to get him up to
speed.”) Colloquial English is appropriate to some kinds of writing (per-
sonal letters, notes, some e-mail) but not to most workplace writing.
Dialectal English
Dialectal English is a social or regional variety of the language that is
comprehensible to people of that social group or region but may be in-
comprehensible to outsiders. Dialect, which is usually nonstandard
English, involves distinct word choice, grammatical forms, and pronun-
ciations. For example, residents of southern Louisiana who descended
from French colonists speak a dialect often referred to as Cajun.
Localisms
A localism is a regional wording or phrasing. For example, a large
sandwich on a long split roll is variously known throughout the United
States as a hero, hoagie, grinder, poor boy, submarine, and torpedo.
Such words normally should be avoided in workplace writing because
not all readers will be familiar with the local meanings.
Slang
Slang is an informal vocabulary composed of figures of speechand col-
orful words used in humorous or extravagant ways. There is no objec-
tive test for slang, and many standard words are given slang applica-
tions. For instance, slang may be a familiar word used in a new way

=== Page 207 ===
6860ch0E.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 174
174 environmental impactstatements
(chill meaning “relax”) or it may be a new word (wonk meaning
“someone who works or studies excessively”).
Most slang is short-lived and has meaning only for a narrow audi-
ence. Sometimes, however, slang becomes standard because the word
fills a legitimate need. Skyscraperand date(as in “go on a date”), for ex-
ample, were once considered slang expressions. Nevertheless, although
E slang may be valid in informal and personal writing or fiction, it gener-
ally should be avoided in workplace writing. See also jargonand techni-
cal writing style.
environmental impact statements
Environmental impact statements (EISs) are documents that describe
the anticipated environmental effects of large-scale construction proj-
ects, such as bridges, dams, roads, wind farms, power plants, and waste-
disposal sites, before work on them begins. EISs report on both the
types (such as ecological, economic, historic, and cultural) and magni-
tudes of the expected impacts. In addition to highlighting these prob-
able effects, EISs are required to describe alternatives to the proposed
project, such as whether to locate a structure or site elsewhere or to
take no action. See also proposals.
Background and Scope
EISs are required by the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA),
which mandates that federal agencies evaluate the probable environ-
mental effects of projects under their control. NEPA established the
Council on Environmental Quality, a board that set guidelines for EISs
to assess the following:
• Direct and indirect environmental impact of the proposed project
• Interference with other activities (such as access or traffic)
• Energy and resource requirements
• Conservation and reparation potential
• Preservation of urban, historic, and cultural quality
• Ways to minimize damages
In addressing these topics, EISs are often multivolume documents that
may cover such diverse topics as economics, geology, health physics,
avian and wetland resources, protected species, noise and transporta-
tion impacts, air pollution, cultural and recreational resources, and
many more, depending on the size and location of the proposed proj-

=== Page 208 ===
6860ch0E.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 175
environmental impactstatements 175
ect.* Many U.S. cities and states also require EISs for planned projects
under their jurisdiction that have probable environmental effects.
Audiences
Draft EISs must be available for public comment for a specified period
(usually 60 days) before the final EIS is prepared and issued. During the
E
comment period, many individuals and groups evaluate the draft and
submit comments. These audiencesinclude federal, state, and local offi-
cials; local populations near the proposed site of the project; legal ex-
perts; industry representatives; labor unions; Native American tribes
(when affected); local and national environmental groups; and others.
Each of these groups will include economic, legal, engineering, and bi-
ology experts, as well as members of the general public. The final EIS
responds to comments made on the draft.
Writing Guidelines
EISs are aimed at multiple readers because of the scope of material they
address. They are organized into sections by the areas evaluated (such
as air, water, soil, socioeconomics, and transportation), with each broad
area further subdivided. Socioeconomics, for example, encompasses
demography, the local economic basis, local government finances, land
use, community services, recreation, and more. Experts and other inter-
ested readers will focus on the areas of concern to them. To reach gen-
eral readers, however, EISs also include an executive summary that
provides an overview of the scope of the project, areas evaluated, areas
of controversy, and issues to be resolved.
Given the diverse fields and backgrounds of EIS readers, writing
the document in plain language is essential and is required by federal
regulations. If you write a portion of an EIS as a subject expert, you
cannot avoid the specialized terms and concepts in your field. However,
strive to communicate in language that is clear and accurate. When you
finish your draft, ask yourself if a friend or relative unfamiliar with
your material could read and understand it. If you don’t think so, revise
it with that reader in mind. When you use essential technical terminol-
ogy, either define it in the text or include it in a glossary of technical
terms. And use consistent terminology, abbreviations, and units for
measurements. If you use both metric and English units of measure-
ment, ensure that they appear together consistently throughout: 5 kilo-
meters (3 miles).
*For example, an Army Corps of Engineers’ Draft Environmental Impact Statement
for a proposed wind farm off the coast of Massachusetts ran to 4,000 pages in four
volumes. (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Press Release No. MA-2004-105, Nov. 8,
2004.)

=== Page 209 ===
6860ch0E.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 176
176 equal / unique / perfect
ETHICS NOTE Members of the public have a vital interest in proposed
activities that may affect their health and safety. They also have the
right through the EIS process to comment on these activities before they
are under way. The public cannot participate in this process, however,
unless they can understand the environmental impact statements de-
signed to inform them of potential effects. To promote public under-
E standing, many states have created plain-language laws. These laws
require that legal and other documents be written in clear, understand-
able language. The federal government also requires that all its new reg-
ulations be written in plain language. Keep these aims in mind as you
draft material for EISs. ✦
Collaborative Guidelines
Given the size, scope, and areas of expertise necessary to develop EISs,
collaboration among technical and legal specialists is essential. To bring
order to a project of such magnitude, it’s especially important that
someone on the writing team review all drafts to ensure that the correct
version is being circulated to the team for comment and to impose over-
all editorial uniformity and consistency. Otherwise, the wrong draft of
one or more sections may be inadvertently released to the public, or
data in one section may not be expressed consistently with data in an-
other section. See collaborative writing.
WEB LINK Environmental ImpactStatements
All EISs issued by federal agencies since 2004 are listed atwww
.epa.gov/compliance/nepa/eisdata.html.For a listing of all EISs issued
by federal agencies since 1969,go to www.library.northwestern.edu/
transportation/searcheis.html.Specific EISs atthis site are available
through interlibrary loan.EISs issued by states are listed atceq.eh
.doe.gov/nepa/epa/filings/state/usmap.htm.EISs for counties and mu-
nicipalities are often available attheir Web sites under environmental
affairs,environmental protection,or a similar organization.For links
to Web sites thatcontain samples of EISs,see bedfordstmartins.com/
alredtechand selectLinks for Handbook Entries.
equal / unique / perfect
Logically, equal (meaning “having the same quantity or value as an-
other”), unique (meaning “one of a kind”), and perfect (meaning “a
state of highest excellence”) are words with absolute meanings and
therefore should not be compared. However, colloquial usage of more

=== Page 210 ===
6860ch0E.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 177
ethics in writing 177
and most as modifiers of equal, unique, and perfect is so common that
an absolute prohibition on such use is impossible.
(cid:2) Our system is more unique [ormore perfect] than theirs.
Some writers try to overcome the problem by using more nearly (more
nearly equal, more nearly unique, more nearly perfect). When clarity
and preciseness are critical, the use of comparative degrees with equal, E
unique, and perfectcan be misleading. It is best to avoid using compar-
ative degrees with absolute terms. See also comparison.
MISLEADING Ours is a more equalpercentage split than theirs.
PRECISE Our percentage split is 51–49; theirs is 54–46.
etc.
Etc. is an abbreviation for the Latin et cetera, meaning “and others” or
“and so on.” Therefore, do not use the redundant phrase and etc. Like-
wise, do not use etc. at the end of a series introduced by the phrases
such as and for example—those phrases already indicate unnamed
items of the same category. Use etc. with a logical progression (1, 2, 3,
etc.) and when at least two items are named. Do not italicize etc.
(cid:2) The sorting machine processes coins (for examplepennies, nickels,
andetc.), and then packages them for redistribution.
Otherwise, avoid etc. because the reader may not be able to infer what
other items a list might include.
VAGUE He will bring note pads, paper clips, etc., to the trade
show.
CLEAR He will bring note pads, paper clips, and other office
supplies to the trade show.
ethics in writing
Ethics refers to the choices we make that affect others for good or ill.
Ethical issues are inherent in writing and speaking because what we
write and say can influence others. Further, how we express ideas af-
fects our audience’s perceptions of us and our organization’s ethical
stance. See also audience.
ETHICS NOTE Obviously, no book can describe how to act ethically in
every situation, but this entry describes some typical ethical lapses to

=== Page 211 ===
6860ch0E.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 178
178 ethics in writing
watch for during revision.* In other entries throughout this book,
ethical issues are highlighted using the symbols surrounding this para-
graph. ✦
Avoid language that attempts to evade responsibility. Some writers
use the passive voice because they hope to avoid responsibility or ob-
scure an issue: “It has been decided” [Who has decided?] or “Several
E
mistakes were made” [Whomade them?].
Avoid deceptive language. Do not use words with more than one
meaning to circumvent the truth. Consider the company document that
stated, “A nominal charge will be assessed for using our facilities.”
When clients objected that the charge was actually very high, the writer
pointed out that the word nominalmeans “the named amount” as well
as “very small.” In that situation, clients had a strong case in charging
that the company was attempting to be deceptive. Various abstract
words, technical and legal jargon, and euphemisms are unethical when
they are used to mislead readers or to hide a serious or dangerous situa-
tion, even though technical or legal experts could interpret them as ac-
curate. See also word choice.
Do not deemphasize or suppress important information. Not in-
cluding information that a reader would want to have, such as potential
safety hazards or hidden costs for which a customer might be respon-
sible, is unethical and possibly illegal. Likewise, do not hide infor-
mation in dense paragraphs with small type and little white space, as is
common in credit-card contracts. Use layoutand designfeatures such as
type size, bullets, lists, and footnotes to highlight information that is
important to readers.
Do not mislead with partial or self-serving information. For ex-
ample, avoid the temptation to highlight a feature or service that read-
ers would find attractive but that is available only with some product
models or at extra cost. (See also logic errors and positive writing.)
Readers could justifiably object that you have given them a false im-
pression to sell them a product or service, especially if you also deem-
phasize the extra cost or other special conditions.
In general, treat others—individuals, companies, groups—with
fairness and with respect. Avoid language that is biased, racist, or sexist
or that perpetuates stereotypes. See also biased language.
In technical writing, guard against reporting false, fabricated, or
plagiarized research and test results. As an author, a technical reviewer,
or an editor, your ethical obligation is to correct or point out any mis-
representations of fact before publication, whether the publication is a
*Adapted from Brenda R. Sims, “Linking Ethics and Language in the Technical
Communication Classroom,” Technical Communication Quarterly 2.3 (Summer
1993): 285–99.

=== Page 212 ===
6860ch0E.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 179
ethics in writing 179
trade journal article, testreport, or product handbook. (See also labora-
tory reports.) The stakes of such ethical oversights are high because of
the potential risk to the health and safety of others. Those at risk can
include unwary consumers and workers injured because of faulty prod-
ucts or unprotected exposure to toxic materials.
Finally, be aware that both plagiarism and violations of copyright
not only are unethical but also can have serious professional and legal E
consequences for you in the classroom and on the job.
WRITER’S CHECKLIST Writing Ethically
Ask yourself the following questions:
(cid:3)
Am I willing to take responsibility, publicly and privately, for whatI
have written?Make sure you can stand behind whatyou have written.
(cid:3)
Is the documentor message honestand truthful?Scrutinize findings
and conclusions carefully.Make sure thatthe data supportthem.
(cid:3)
Am I acting in my employer’s, my client’s, the public’s, or my own best
long-term interest?Have someone outside your company review and
commenton whatyou have written.
(cid:3)
Does the documentor message violate anyone’s rights?If information
is confidential and you have serious concerns,consider a review by
the company’s legal staff or an attorney.
(cid:3)
Am I ethically consistentin my writing?Apply consistently the princi-
ples outlined here and those you have assimilated throughoutyour
life to meetthis standard.
(cid:3)
Whatif everybody acted or communicated in this way?If you were the
intended reader,consider whether the message would be acceptable
and respectful.
If the answers to these questions do notcome easily,consider asking a
trusted colleague to review and commenton whatyou have written.
WEB LINK Professional Codes of Ethics
Professional groups often create ethical codes of conductfor their
members.One example is the National Society of Professional Engi-
neers (NSPE),which represents individual engineering professionals
and licensed engineers.For links to the NSPE’s code as well as codes of
ethics for other fields,see bedfordstmartins.com/alredtechand select
Links for Handbook Entries.

=== Page 213 ===
6860ch0E.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 180
180 euphemisms
euphemisms
A euphemism is an inoffensive substitute for a word or phrase that
could be distasteful, offensive, or too blunt: passed away for died; pre-
viously owned or preowned for used; lay off or restructure for fire or
terminate employees. Used judiciously, euphemisms can help you avoid
E
embarrassing or offending someone.
ETHICS NOTE Euphemisms can also hide the facts of a situation (inci-
dentor eventfor accident) or be a form of affectationif used carelessly.
Avoid them especially in international correspondence and other forms
of global communication where their meanings could be not only con-
fusing but also misleading. See also ethics in writing. ✦
everybody / everyone
Both everybody and everyone are usually considered singular and take
singular verbsand pronouns.
(cid:2) Everyonehere leavesat 4:30 p.m.
(cid:2) Everybodyat the meeting presented his or herindividual
assessment.
However, the meaning can be obviously plural.
(cid:2) Everyonethought the report should be revised, and I really
couldn’t blame them.
Although normally written as one word, write it as two words if you
wish to emphasize each individual in a group. (“Every one of the team
members contributed to this discovery.”) See also agreement.
exclamation marks
The exclamation mark (!) indicates strong feeling, urgency, elation, or
surprise (“Hurry!” “Great!” “Wow!”). (See also interjections.) How-
ever, it cannot make an argument more convincing, lend force to a
weak statement, or call attention to an intended irony.
An exclamation mark can be used after a whole sentence or an ele-
ment of a sentence.
(cid:2) This meeting—please note it well!—concerns our budget deficit.

=== Page 214 ===
6860ch0E.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 181
executive summaries 181
When used with quotation marks, the exclamation mark goes outside,
unless what is quoted is an exclamation.
(cid:2) The paramedic shouted, “Don’t touch the victim!” The bystander
then, according to a witness, “jumped like a kangaroo”!
In instructionsand manuals, the exclamation mark is often used in text
and visuals for cautions and warnings (“Danger!” ). See also em- E
phasis.
executive summaries
An executive summary consolidates the principal points of a report or
proposal. Executive summaries differ from abstracts in that readers
scan abstracts to decide whether to read the work in full. However, an
executive summary may be the only section of a longer work read by
many readers, so it must accurately and concisely represent the original
document. It should restate the document’s purpose, scope, methods,
findings, conclusions, and recommendations, as well as summarize how
results were obtained or the reasons for the recommendations. Execu-
tive summaries tend to be about 10 percent of the length of the docu-
ments they summarize and generally follow the same sequence.
Write the executive summary so that it can be read independently
of the report or proposal. Executive summaries may occasionally in-
clude a figure, table, or footnote if that information is essential to the
summary. However, do not refer by number to figures, tables, or refer-
ences contained elsewhere in the document. See Figure F–5 (pages
205–6), which is an executive summary of a report on the disposition of
ethics cases in an aircraft corporation.
WRITER’S CHECKLIST Writing Executive Summaries
(cid:3)
Write the executive summary after you have completed the original
document.
(cid:3)
Avoid or define terminology thatmay notbe familiar to your in-
tended audience.
(cid:3)
Spell outall uncommon symbols and abbreviations.
(cid:3)
Make the summary concise,butdo notomittransitional words and
phrases (however,moreover,therefore,for example,next).
(cid:3)
Include only information discussed in the original document.
(cid:3)
Place the executive summary atthe very beginning of the body of the
report,as described in formal reports.

=== Page 215 ===
6860ch0E.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 182
182 expletives
expletives
An expletive is a word that fills the position of another word, phrase, or
clause. Itand thereare common expletives.
(cid:2) Itis certain that this fuel pump will fail at high pressures.
E
In the example, the expletive itoccupies the position of subject in place
of the real subject, that this fuel pump will fail at high pressures. Exple-
tives are sometimes necessary to avoid awkwardness, but they are com-
monly overused, and most sentences can be better stated without them.
Many were
(cid:2) There were manyfileslost when we converted to the new server.
^ ^
In addition to its grammatical use, the word expletive means an excla-
mation or oath, especially one that is obscene.
explicit / implicit
An explicitstatement is one expressed directly, with precision and clarity.
(cid:2) He gave us explicitdirections to the Wausau facility.
An implicit meaning is one that is not directly expressed.
(cid:2) Although the CEO did not mention the lawsuit directly, the com-
pany’s commitment to ethical practices was implicitin her speech.
exposition
Exposition, or expository writing, informs readers by presenting facts
and ideas in direct and concise language; it usually relies less on colorful
or figurative language than writing meant to be expressive or persua-
sive. Expository writing attempts to explain to readers what the subject
is, how it works, and how it relates to something else. Exposition is
aimed at the readers’ understanding rather than at their imagination or
emotions; it is a sharing of the writer’s knowledge. Exposition aims to
provide accurate, complete information and to analyze it for the read-
ers. See also audience.
Because it is the most effective form of discourse for explaining diffi-
cult subjects, exposition is widely used in reports, memos, and other types
of technical writing. To use exposition effectively, you must have a thor-
ough knowledge of your subject. As with all writing, how much of that
knowledge you convey depends on the reader’s needs and your purpose.

=== Page 216 ===
6860ch0F.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 183
F
fact
F
Expressions containing the word fact (“due to the fact that,” “except
for the fact that,” “as a matter of fact,” or “because of the fact that”)
are often wordy substitutes for more accurate terms.
Because
(cid:2) Due to the fact thatthe technical staff has a high turnover rate,
^
our training program has suffered.
Do not use the word factto refer to matters of judgment or opinion.
In my opinion,
(cid:2) It is a fact thatour research has improved because we now have a
^
capable technical staff.
The word factis, of course, valid when facts are what is meant.
(cid:2) Our tests uncovered numerous facts to support your conclusion.
See also concisenessand logic errors.
FAQs (Frequently Asked Questions)
An FAQ is a list of questions, paired with their answers, that readers
will likely ask about products, services, or other information presented
on a Web site or in customer-oriented documents. By presenting com-
monly sought information in one place, an FAQ saves readers from
searching through an entire document or Web site to find what they
need.
A good FAQ can help create a positive impression with customers
or clients because you are acknowledging that their time is valuable. An
FAQ also helps a company spend less time answering phone calls and
e-mail questions by anticipating customer needs and providing impor-
tant information in a simple, a logical, and an organized format. How-
ever, an FAQ is not a substitute for solving problems with a product or
service. If customers are experiencing numerous problems because of a
183

=== Page 217 ===
6860ch0F.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 184
184 FAQs
product design or programming flaw, for example, you need to work
with your company’s product developers to correct the problem rather
than try to solve every potential problem within an FAQ.
Questions to Include
The first step in writing an FAQ is to determine the questions your cus-
tomers may ask about your organization, products, or services. Put
F yourself in your customers’ place and keep in mind that even if you
view a question as too simple, some customers will find value in the an-
swer to that question.
A good place to start is by asking customer service representatives
what questions customers typically ask and the appropriate answers to
those questions. If customers frequently ask about company stock in-
formation and request annual reports, for example, your FAQ list could
include the question “How do I obtain a copy of your latest annual re-
port?” This question can be followed with a brief answer that includes
the name, phone number, and e-mail address of the person who distrib-
utes the annual reports. For a Web site, you can also provide a link to a
copy of the current annual report that can be downloaded. See also
writing for the Web.
Organization
After developing the list of questions and answers, organize the list so
that readers can find the information they need quickly and easily.
Study other FAQs that your readers might review for products or ser-
vices similar to yours. Use these FAQs to find answers to questions:
Can you find answers quickly, or do you need to scroll through many
pages to find them? Consider how the questions are organized: Are they
separated into logical categories or listed in random order? Is it easy to
differentiate the question from the answer? Do the answers provide too
little or too much information?*
List your questions in decreasing order of importanceso that readers
can obtain the most important information first. See order-of-importance
method of development. If you have a number of questions that are re-
lated to a specific topic, such as investor relations, product returns, or
completing forms, group them into categories and identify each category
with a heading, such as “Investor Relations,” “Shipping,” and “Forms.”
You may also want to create a table of contents at the top of the FAQ
page so that readers can find quickly the topics relevant to their interests.
*For examples of FAQs, search with QueryCATat www.querycat.com, which offers
the “largest database of frequently asked questions.”

=== Page 218 ===
6860ch0F.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 185
feasibility reports 185
Placement
The location of your FAQ should enable readers to find answers
quickly. For Web sites, an FAQ page is usually linked from the home-
page either in a directory or with a text link for easy access. In small
printed documents, such as brochures, FAQs are usually highlighted
and placed after the standard information in the body of the document.
WRITER’S CHECKLIST Developing an FAQ F
(cid:3)
Focus on your reader.Write your questions and answers from a “you”
viewpointand with a positive,conversational tone.
(cid:3)
Separate long FAQ lists.Group related questions under topic headings.
For long online FAQs,consider listing only questions with links to sep-
arate pages,each containing an individual question and answer.
(cid:3)
Distinguish questions from answers.Use boldface for questions and
use white space to separate questions from answers.Use sparingly
multiple colors,italics,or other formatting styles thatcan make the
listdifficultto read.
(cid:3)
Keep questions and answers concise.Keep questions brief and answers
to no more than one paragraph.If a question has a long answer,add a
link to a separate Web page or refer to an appropriate page number
in a printed document.
(cid:3)
Keep the listupdated.Review and update FAQs atleastmonthly—or
more frequently if your contentchanges often.Make itpossible for
your customers to submitquestions they would like to see added to
the FAQ list.
fax (see selecting the medium)
feasibility reports
When organizations consider a new project—developing a new prod-
uct or service, expanding a customer base, purchasing equipment, or
moving operations—they first try to determine the project’s chances for
success. A feasibility report presents evidence about the practicality of a
proposed project based on specific criteria. It answers such questions as
the following: Is new construction or development necessary? Is suffi-
cient staff available? What are the costs? Is funding available? What are
the legal ramifications? Based on the findings of this analysis, the report

=== Page 219 ===
6860ch0F.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 186
186 feasibility reports
offers logical conclusions and recommends whether the project should
be carried out. When feasibility reports stress specific steps that should
be taken as a result of a study of a problem or an issue, they are often
referred to as recommendation reports. In the condensed feasibility re-
port shown in Figure F–1, a consultant conducts a study to determine
how to upgrade a company’s computer system and Internet capability.
F
Introduction
The purpose of this report is to determine which of two proposed
options would best enable Darnell Business Forms Corporation to
upgrade its file servers and its Internet capacity to meet its increas-
ing data and communication needs....
Background. In October 2008, the Information Development
Group put the MACRON System into operation. Since then, the
volume of processing transactions has increased fivefold (from
1,000 to 5,000 updates per day). This increase has severely im-
paired system response time; in fact, average response time has
increased from 10 seconds to 120 seconds. Further, our new
Web-based client-services system has increased exponentially
the demand for processing speed and access capacity.
Scope. We have investigated two alternative solutions to provide
increased processing capacity: (1) purchase of an additional
Aurora processor to supplement the one in operation, and
(2) purchase of an Icardo 60 with expandable peripherals to
replace the Aurora processor currently in operation. The two
alternatives are evaluated here, according to both cost and ex-
panded capacity for future operations.
Additional Aurora Processor
Purchasing a second Aurora processor would require increased
annual maintenance costs, salary for a second computer specialist,
increased energy costs, and a one-time construction cost for neces-
sary remodeling and installing Internet connections.
Annual maintenance costs $35,000
Annual costs for computer specialist 75,000
Annual increased energy costs 7,500
Total annual operating costs $117,500
Construction cost (one-time) 50,000
Total first-year costs $167,500
The installation and operation of another Aurora processor are ex-
pected to produce savings in system reliability and readiness.
FIGUREF–1. Feasibility Report

=== Page 220 ===
6860ch0F.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 187
feasibility reports 187
System Reliability. An additional Aurora would reduce current
downtime periods from four to two per week. Downtime recovery
averages 30 minutes and affects 40 users. Assuming that 50 percent
of users require system access at a given time, we determined that
the following reliability savings would result:
2 downtimes ×0.5 hours ×40 users ×50% ×$50/hour overtime
×52 weeks = $52,000 annual savings. F
[The feasibility report would also discuss the second option—
purchase of the Icardo 60 and its long-term savings.]
Conclusion
A comparison of costs for both systems indicates that the Icardo 60
would cost $2,200 more in first-year costs.
Aurora Icardo 60
Net additional operating costs $56,300 $84,000
One-time construction costs 50,000 24,500
First-year total $106,300 $108,500
Installation of an additional Aurora processor would permit the
present information-processing systems to operate relatively
smoothly and efficiently. It would not, however, provide the ex-
panded processing capacity that the Icardo 60 processor would
for implementing new subsystems required to increase processing
speed and Internet access.
Recommendation
The Icardo 60 processor should be purchased because of the long-
term savings and because its additional capacity and flexibility will
allow for greater expansion in the future.
3
FIGUREF–1. Feasibility Report(continued)
Before beginning to write a feasibility report, analyze the needs of
the audienceas well as the contextand purposeof the study. Then write
a purpose statement, such as “The purpose of this study is to determine
the feasibility of expanding our Pacific Rim operations,” to guide you or
a collaborative team. See also brainstormingand collaborative writing.

=== Page 221 ===
6860ch0F.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 188
188 female / male
ReportSections
Every feasibility report should contain an introduction, a body, a con-
clusion, and a recommendation. See also proposalsand formal reports.
Introduction. The introduction states the purpose of the report, de-
scribes the circumstances that led to the report, and includes any perti-
nent background information. It may also discuss the scope of the
F report, any procedures or methods used in the analysis of alternatives,
and any limitations of the study.
Body. The body of the report presents a detailed review of the alterna-
tives for achieving the goals of the project. Examine each option ac-
cording to specific criteria, such as cost and financing, availability of
staff, and other relevant requirements, identifying the subsections with
headingsto guide readers.
Conclusion. The conclusion interprets the available options and leads
to one option as the best or most feasible.
Recommendation. The recommendation section clearly presents the
writer’s (or team’s) opinion on which alternative best meets the criteria
as summarized in the conclusion.
WEB LINK Feasibility Reports
For links to full feasibility reports,see bedfordstmartins.com/alredtech
and selectLinks for Handbook Entries.
female / male
The terms femaleand maleare usually restricted to scientific, legal, and
medical contexts (a female suspect, a male patient). Keep in mind that
the terms sound cold and impersonal. Girl, woman, and lady or boy,
man, and gentleman may be acceptable substitutes in other contexts,
but be sensitive to their connotations involving age, dignity, and social
position. See also biased languageand connotation / denotation.

=== Page 222 ===
6860ch0F.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 189
figures of speech 189
few / a few
In certain contexts, few carries more negative overtones than does the
phrase a few.
NEGATIVE The report contains fewhelpful ideas.
POSITIVE The report contains a fewhelpful ideas.
F
fewer / less
Fewer refers to items that can be counted (count nouns). (“Fewer em-
ployees retired than we expected.”) Less refers to mass quantities or
amounts (mass nouns). (“Because we had less rain this year, the crop
yield decreased.”) See also English as a second language.
figuratively / literally
Literally means “actually” and is often confused with figuratively,
which means “metaphorically.” To say that someone “literally turned
green with envy” would mean that the person actually changed color.
(cid:2) In the winner’s circle the jockey was, figurativelyspeaking, ten feet
tall.
(cid:2) When he said, “Let’s bury our competitors,” he did not mean it
literally.
Avoid the use of literallyto reinforce the importance of something.
(cid:2) She was literallythe best of the applicants.
See also intensifiers.
figures of speech
A figure of speech is an imaginative expression that often compares two
things that are basically not alike but have at least one thing in com-
mon. For example, if a device is cone-shaped and has an opening at the
narrow end, you might say that it looks like a volcano.

=== Page 223 ===
6860ch0F.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 190
190 figures of speech
Figures of speech can clarify the unfamiliar by relating a new con-
cept to one with which readers are familiar. In that respect, they help es-
tablish understanding between the specialist and the nonspecialist. (See
audience.) Figures of speech can help translate the abstract into the
concrete; in the process of doing so, they can also make writing more
colorful and graphic. (See also abstract / concrete words.) A figure of
speech must make sense, however, to achieve the desired effect.
F ILLOGICAL Without the fuel of tax incentives, our economic engine
would operate less efficiently.
[It would not operate at all without fuel.]
Figures of speech also must be consistent to be effective.
(cid:2) We must get our research program back on course, and we are
steer the effort.
counting on you to carry the ball.
^
A figure of speech should not overshadow the point the writer is trying
to make. In addition, it is better to use no figure of speech at all than to
use a trite one. A surprise that comes “like a bolt out of the blue” seems
stale and not much of a surprise at all. See also clichés.
Types of Figures of Speech
Analogiesare comparisons that show the ways in which two objects or
concepts are similar, often used to make one of them easier to under-
stand. The following example explains a computer search technique by
comparing it to the use of keywords in a dictionary.
(cid:2) The search technique used in indexed sequential processingis simi-
lar to a search technique you might use to find the page on which a
particular word is located in a dictionary. You might scan the key-
words located at the top of each dictionary page that identify the
first and last words on each page until you find the keywords that
encompass the word you seek. Indexed sequential processing
works the same way with computer files.
Hyperboles are gross exaggerations used to achieve an effect or em-
phasis.
(cid:2) We were dead after working all night on the report.
Litotes are understatements, for emphasis or effect, achieved by deny-
ing the opposite of the point you are making.
(cid:2) Over 1,600 pages is no small size for a book.

=== Page 224 ===
6860ch0F.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 191
first/ firstly 191
Metaphorsare figures of speech that point out similarities between two
things by treating them as though they were the same thing.
(cid:2) The astronaut’s umbilical cordcarries life-sustaining oxygen for
space-walking.
Metonyms are figures of speech that use one aspect of a thing to repre-
sent it, such as the bluefor the sky and wheelsfor a car.
(cid:2) The economist predicted a decrease in hard-hatjobs. F
Personification is a figure of speech that attributes human characteris-
tics to nonhuman things or abstract ideas. We might refer, for example,
to the birthof a planet or apply emotions to machines.
(cid:2) She said that she was frustrated with the stubbornsecurity system.
Similes are direct comparisons of two essentially unlike things, linking
them with the word likeor as.
(cid:2) Reconstructing the plane’s fuselage following the accident was like
piecing together a jigsaw puzzle.
Avoid figures of speech in global communication and international cor-
respondence because people in other cultures may translate figures of
speech literally and be confused by their meanings.
fine
When used in expressions such as “I feel fine” or “a fine day,” fine is
colloquial and, like the word nice, is often too vague for technical writ-
ing. Use the word fineto mean “refined,” “delicate,” or “pure.”
(cid:2) A finefilm of oil covered the surface of the water.
(cid:2) Finecrystal is made in Austria.
(cid:2) The Court made a finedistinction between the two statutes.
first / firstly
First and firstly are both adverbs. Avoid firstly in favor of first, which
sounds less stiff than firstly. The same is true of other ordinal numbers,
such as second, third, and so on.

=== Page 225 ===
6860ch0F.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 192
192 flammable / inflammable / nonflammable
flammable / inflammable / nonflammable
Both flammable and inflammable mean “capable of being set on fire.”
Because the in- prefix usually causes the base word to take its opposite
meaning (incapable, incompetent), use flammable instead of inflam-
mable to avoid possible misunderstanding. (“The cargo of gasoline is
flammable.”) Nonflammable is the opposite, meaning “not capable of
being set on fire.” (“The asbestos suit was nonflammable.”)
F
flowcharts
A flowchart is a diagram using symbols, words, or pictures to show the
stages of a process in sequence from beginning to end. A flowchart pro-
vides an overview of a process and allows the reader to identify its es-
sential steps quickly and easily. Flowcharts can take several forms. The
steps might be represented by labeled blocks, as shown in Figure F–2;
pictorial symbols, as shown in Figure F–3; or ISO (International Orga-
nization for Standardization) symbols, as shown in Figure F–4.
Steps Taken During Widespread Power Outage
Downed live wires Transmission lines
and public facilities serving thousands
without power of customers
Main distribution
lines serving large Substation
numbers of equipment
customers
Secondary lines Service lines to
serving individual homes
neighborhoods and businesses
Source: Potomac Electric Power Company
FIGURE F–2. FlowchartUsing Labeled Blocks (Depicting Electric Utility Power
Restoration Process)

=== Page 226 ===
6860ch0F.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 193
flowcharts 193
F
FIGUREF–3. FlowchartUsing Pictorial Symbols.Source:FDA Consumer,Nov.—Dec.
2004.U.S.Food and Drug Administration.
Start Oval indicates the start
or end of a flow.
Solid line represents the flow of
data or control. Use arrowheads
when they aid clarity.
Manual Trapezoid indicates a human operation
Operation such as a computer entry.
Rectangle indicates a function
Basic that requires no input or decision.
Process
Diamond indicates a decision point
with a single entry but a number
of alternative exits.
Decision
Circle connects a flowchart
across pages and sections.
Divided rectangle indicates a
Predefined subroutine, module, or other
Process operation defined elsewhere.
End
FIGURE F–4. Common ISO FlowchartSymbols (with Annotations)

=== Page 227 ===
6860ch0F.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 194
194 footnotes
WRITER’S CHECKLIST Creating Flowcharts
(cid:3)
Label each step in the process or identify each step with labeled
blocks,pictorial representations,or standardized symbols.
(cid:3)
Follow the standard flow directions:leftto rightand top to bottom.
Indicate any nonstandard flow directions with arrows.
(cid:3)
Include a key (or callouts) if the flowchartcontains symbols your
audiencemay notunderstand.
F
(cid:3)
Use standardized symbols for flowcharts thatdocumentcomputer
programs and other information-processing procedures,as detailed
in Information Processing—Documentation Symbols and Conventions
for Data, Program and System Flowcharts, Program Network Charts,
and System Resources Charts,ISO 5807-1985 (E).
For advice on integrating flowcharts into your text, see visuals. See also
global graphics.
footnotes (see documenting sources)
forceful / forcible
Although forceful and forcible are both adjectives meaning “character-
ized by or full of force,” forcefulis usually limited to persuasive ability
and forcibleto physical force.
(cid:2) John made a forcefulpresentation at the committee meeting.
(cid:2) Firefighters must often make forcibleentries into buildings.
foreign words in English
The English language has a long history of borrowing words from other
languages. Most borrowing occurred so long ago that we seldom recog-
nize the borrowed terms (also called loan words) as being of foreign
origin (kindergarten from German, animal from Latin, church from
Greek).
Words not likely to be familiar to readers or not fully assimilated
into the English language are set in italics(sinequanon, coup de grâce,
in res, in camera). Most dictionaries offer guidance, although you
should also be guided by the context. Even when foreign words have

=== Page 228 ===
6860ch0F.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 195
formal reports 195
been fully assimilated, they often retain their diacritical marks (cliché,
résumé, vis-à-vis). As foreign words are absorbed into English, their
plural forms give way to English plurals (agenda becomes agendas and
formulaebecomes formulas).
Generally, foreign expressions should be used only if they serve a
real need. (See also e.g./ i.e. and etc.) The overuse of foreign words in
an attempt to impress your reader or achieve elegance is affectation. Ef-
fective communication can be accomplished only if your readers under-
stand what you write. So choose foreign expressions only when they F
make an idea clearer or there is no English substitute (Schadenfreude
for “pleasure taken from someone else’s misfortune”).
foreword / forward
Although the pronunciation is the same, the spellings and meanings of
these two words are quite different. The word foreword is a noun
meaning “introductory statement at the beginning of a book or other
work.”
(cid:2) The director wrote a forewordfor the proposal.
The word forwardis an adjectiveor adverbmeaning “at or toward the
front.”
(cid:2) Sliding the throttle to the forwardposition [adjective] will cause
the boat to move forward. [adverb]
formal reports
Formal reports are usually written accounts of major projects that re-
quire substantial research, and they often involve more than one writer.
See also collaborative writing.
Most formal reports are divided into three primary parts—front
matter, body, and back matter—each of which contains a number of el-
ements. The number and arrangement of the elements may vary de-
pending on the subject, the length of the report, and the kinds of
material covered. Further, many organizations have a preferred style for
formal reports and furnish guidelines for report writers to follow. If you
are not required to follow a specific style, use the formatrecommended
in this entry. The following list includes most of the elements a formal
report might contain, in the order they typically appear. (The items
shown with page numbers appear in the sample formal report on pages

=== Page 229 ===
6860ch0F.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 196
196 formal reports
201–17.) Often, a cover letter or memo precedes the front matter and
identifies the report by title, the person or persons to whom it is being
sent, the reason it was written, and any content that the audience con-
siders important, as shown on page 201.
FRONT MATTER
Title Page (202)
Abstract (203)
Table of Contents (204)
F
List of Figures
List of Tables
Foreword
Preface
List of Abbreviations and Symbols
BODY
Executive summary (205)
Introduction (207)
Text (including headings) (210)
Conclusions (215)
Recommendations (216)
Explanatory Notes
References (or Works Cited) (217)
BACK MATTER
Appendixes
Bibliography
Glossary
Index
FrontMatter
The front matter serves several functions: It gives readers a general idea
of the writer’s purpose, it gives an overview of the type of information
in the report, and it lists where specific information is covered in the re-
port. Not all formal reports include every element of front matter de-
scribed here. A title page and table of contents are usually mandatory,
but the scopeof the report and its contextas well as the intended audi-
ence determine whether the other elements are included.
Title Page. Although the formats of title pages may vary, they often in-
clude the following items:
• The full title of the report. The title describes the topic, scope, and
purpose of the report, as described in titles.

=== Page 230 ===
6860ch0F.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 197
formal reports 197
• The name of the writer(s), principal investigator(s), or compiler(s).
Sometimes contributors identify themselves by their job title in the
organization or by their tasks in contributing to the report (Olivia
Jones, Principal Investigator).
• The date or dates of the report. For one-time reports, the date
shown is the date the report is distributed. For reports issued peri-
odically (monthly, quarterly, or yearly), the subtitle shows the
period that the report covers and the distribution date is shown
F
elsewhere on the title page, as shown in Figure F–5 on page 202.
• The name of the organization for which the writer(s) works.
• The name of the organization to which the report is being submit-
ted. This information is included if the report is written for a
customer or client.
The title page should not be numbered, as in the example on page 202,
but it is considered page i. The back of the title page, which is left blank
and unnumbered, is considered page ii, and the abstract falls on page
iii. The body of the report begins with Arabic number 1, and a new chap-
ter or large section typically begins on a new right-hand (odd-numbered)
page. Reports with printing on only one side of each sheet can be num-
bered consecutively regardless of where new sections begin. Center page
numbers at the bottom of each page throughout the report.
Abstract. An abstract, which normally follows the title page, high-
lights the major points of the report, as shown on page 203, enabling
readers to decide whether to read the report.
Table of Contents. A table of contents lists all the major sections or
headings of the report in their order of appearance, as shown on page
204, along with their page numbers.
Listof Figures. All visuals contained in the report—drawings, photo-
graphs, maps, charts, and graphs—are labeled as figures. When a re-
port contains more than five figures, list them, along with their page
numbers, in a separate section, beginning on a new page immediately
following the table of contents. Number figures consecutively with Ara-
bic numbers.
Listof Tables. When a report contains more than five tables, list them,
along with their titles and page numbers, in a separate section immedi-
ately following the list of figures (if there is one). Number tables consec-
utively with Arabic numbers.

=== Page 231 ===
6860ch0F.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 198
198 formal reports
Foreword. A foreword is an optional introductory statement about a
formal report or publication that is written by someone other than the
author(s). The foreword author is usually an authority in the field or an
executive of the organization sponsoring the report. That author’s name
and affiliation appear at the end of the foreword, along with the date it
was written. The foreword generally provides background information
about the publication’s significance and places it in the context of other
works in the field. The foreword precedes the preface when a work has
F both.
Preface. The preface, another type of optional introductory statement,
is written by the author(s) of the formal report. It may announce the
work’s purpose, scope, and context (including any special circum-
stances leading to the work). A preface may also specify the audience
for a work, contain acknowledgments of those who helped in its prepa-
ration, and cite permission obtained for the use of copyrighted works.
See also copyright.
List of Abbreviations and Symbols. When the report uses numerous
abbreviationsand symbols that readers may not be able to interpret, the
front matter may include a section that lists symbols and abbreviations
with their meanings.
Body
The body is the section of the report that provides context for the re-
port, describes in detail the methods and procedures used to generate
the report, demonstrates how results were obtained, describes the re-
sults, draws conclusions, and, if appropriate, makes recommendations.
Executive Summary. The body of the report begins with the executive
summary, which provides a more complete overview of the report than
an abstract does. See an example on pages 205–6 and review the entry
cross-referenced above.
Introduction. The introductiongives readers any general information,
such as the report’s purpose, scope, and context necessary to under-
stand the detailed information in the rest of the report (see pages
207–9).
Text. The text of the body presents, as appropriate, the details of how
the topic was investigated, how a problem was solved, what alternatives
were explored, and how the best choice among them was selected. This
information is enhanced by the use of visuals, tables, and references that
both clarify the text and persuade the reader. See also persuasion.

=== Page 232 ===
6860ch0F.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 199
formal reports 199
Conclusions. The conclusions section pulls together the results of the
research and interprets the findings of the report, as shown on pages
215–16.
Recommendations. Recommendations, which are sometimes com-
bined with the conclusions, state what course of action should be taken
based on the earlier arguments and conclusions of the study, as are
shown on pages 215–16.
F
Explanatory Notes. Occasionally, reports contain notes that amplify
terms or points for some readers that might be a distraction for others.
If such notes are not included as footnotes on the page where the term
or point appears, they may appear in a “Notes” section at the end of
the report.
References (or Works Cited). A list of references or works cited appears
in a separate section if the report refers to or quotes directly from
printed or online research sources. If your employer has a preferred ref-
erence style, follow it; otherwise, use one of the guidelines provided in
the entry documenting sources. For a relatively short report, place a ref-
erences or works-cited section at the end of the body of the report, as
shown on page 217. For a report with a number of sections or chapters,
place references or works cited at the end of each major section or
chapter. In either case, title the reference or works-cited section as such
and begin it on a new page. If a particular reference appears in more
than one section or chapter, repeat it in full in each appropriate refer-
ence section. See also plagiarismand quotations.
Back Matter
The back matter of a formal report contains supplementary material,
such as where to find additional information about the topic (bibliogra-
phy), and expands on certain subjects (appendixes). Other back-matter
elements define special terms (glossary) and provide information on
how to easily locate information in the report (index). For very large
formal reports, back-matter sections may be individually numbered
(Appendix A, Appendix B).
Appendixes. An appendix clarifies or supplements the report with in-
formation that is too detailed or lengthy for the primary audience but is
relevant to secondary audiences.
Bibliography. A bibliographylists alphabetically all of the sources that
were consulted to prepare the report—not just those cited—and sug-
gests additional resources that readers might want to consult.

=== Page 233 ===
6860ch0F.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 200
200 formal reports
Glossary. A glossaryis an alphabetical list of specialized terms used in
the report and their definitions.
Index. An index is an alphabetical list of all the major topics and
subtopics discussed in the report. It cites the page numbers where dis-
cussion of each topic can be found and allows readers to find informa-
tion on topics quickly and easily. The index is always the final section
of a report. See also indexing.
F
DIGITAL TIP
Creating Styles and Templates
In most word-processing programs, you can create styles—sets of
formatting characteristics for text elements such as headings, para-
graphs,and lists—that allow you to automate much of the format-
ting of your report. Once you specify your styles, save them as a
template and use iteach time you create a formal report.For step-by-
step instructions,see bedfordstmartins.com/alredtechand selectDigi-
tal Tips,“Creating Styles and Templates.”
Sample Formal Report
Figure F–5 shows the typical sections of a formal report. Keep in mind
that the number and arrangement of the elements vary, depending on
the context, especially the requirements of an organization or a client.

=== Page 234 ===
6860ch0F.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 201
formal reports 201
CGF Aircraft Corporation
Memo
To: Members of the Ethics and Business Conduct Committee
SL
From: Susan Litzinger, Director of Ethics and Business Conduct F
Date: March 4, 2009
Subject: Reported Ethics Cases, 2008
Enclosed is “Reported Ethics Cases: Annual Report, 2008.” This Identifies
report, required by CGF Policy CGF-EP-01, contains a review topic
of the ethics cases handled by CGF ethics officers and managers
during 2008, the first year of our Ethics Program.
The ethics cases reported are analyzed according to two cate-
gories: (1) major ethics cases, or those potentially involving Briefly sum-
serious violations of company policy or illegal conduct, and marizes
(2) minor ethics cases, or those that do not involve serious policy content
violations or illegal conduct. The report also examines the mode
of contact in all of the reported cases and the disposition of the
substantiated major ethics cases.
It is my hope that this report will provide the Committee with the
information needed to assess the effectiveness of the first year of
CGF’s Ethics Program and to plan for the coming year. Please let Offers
me know if you have any questions about this report or if you contact
need any further information. I may be reached at (555) 211-2121 information
and by e-mail at sl@cgf.com.
Enc.
FIGUREF–5. Formal Report(Cover Memo).Reprinted and adapted by permission
of Susan Litzinger,a studentatPennsylvania State University,Altoona.

=== Page 235 ===
6860ch0F.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 202
202 formal reports
Full title REPORTED ETHICS CASES
Annual Report, 2008
F
Author’s Prepared by Susan Litzinger
name and Director of Ethics and Business Conduct
job title
Report Distributed March 4, 2009
Prepared for
Company The Ethics and Business Conduct Committee
name CGF Aircraft Corporation
No page
number
FIGUREF–5. Formal Report(continued) (Title Page)

=== Page 236 ===
6860ch0F.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 203
formal reports 203
Reported Ethics Cases—2008
ABSTRACT
This report examines the nature and disposition of 3,458 ethics
cases handled companywide by CGF Aircraft Corporation’s
ethics officers and managers during 2008. The purpose of this Summarizes F
annual report is to provide the Ethics and Business Conduct purpose
Committee with the information necessary for assessing the effec-
tiveness of the Ethics Program’s first year of operation. Records
maintained by ethics officers and managers of all contacts were
Methods compiled and categorized into two main types: (1) major ethics
and scope cases, or cases involving serious violations of company policies
or illegal conduct, and (2) minor ethics cases, or cases not in-
volving serious policy violations or illegal conduct. This report Conclusions
provides examples of the types of cases handled in each category and recom-
and analyzes the disposition of 30 substantiated major ethics mendations
cases. Recommendations for planning for the second year of the
Ethics Program are (1) continuing the channels of communication
now available in the Ethics Program, (2) increasing financial and
technical support for the Ethics Hotline, (3) disseminating the an-
nual ethics report in some form to employees to ensure employee
awareness of the company’s commitment to uphold its Ethics
Policies and Procedures, and (4) implementing some measure of
recognition for ethical behavior to promote and reward ethical
conduct.
Lowercase Roman
numerals used on
iii
front-matter
pages
FIGUREF–5. Formal Report(continued) (Abstract)

=== Page 237 ===
6860ch0F.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 204
204 formal reports
Reported Ethics Cases—2008
Uniform
heading TABLE OF CONTENTS
styles
F
ABSTRACT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . iii
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Ethics and Business Conduct Policies and Procedures . . . . . . . . 3
Indented Confidentiality Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
subheads Documentation of Ethics Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
Major/Minor Category Definition and Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
ANALYSIS OF REPORTED ETHICS CASES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Page Reported Ethics Cases, by Major/Minor Category . . . . . . . . . . . 6
number Major Ethics Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
for each Minor Ethics Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
entry Mode of Contact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
WORKS CITED . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
iv
FIGUREF–5. Formal Report(continued) (Table of Contents)

=== Page 238 ===
6860ch0F.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 205
formal reports 205
Reported Ethics Cases—2008
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
This report examines the nature and disposition of the 3,458 ethics cases
handled by the CGFAircraft Corporation’s ethics officers and managers
during 2008. The purpose of this report is to provide CGF’s Ethics and States
F
Business Conduct Committee with the information necessary for assess- purpose
ing the effectiveness of the first year of the company’s Ethics Program.
Effective January 1, 2008, the Ethics and Business Conduct Committee
(the Committee) implemented a policy and procedures for the admin-
istration of CGF’s new Ethics Program. The purpose of the Ethics
Program, established by the Committee, is to “promote ethical business Provides
conduct through open communication and compliance with company back-
ethics standards.” The Office of Ethics and Business Conduct was created ground
to administer the Ethics Program. The director of the Office of Ethics and infor-
mation
Business Conduct, along with seven ethics officers throughout the corpo-
ration, was given the responsibility for the following objectives:
• Communicate the values and standards for CGF’s Ethics Program to
employees.
• Inform employees about company policies regarding ethical business
conduct.
• Establish companywide channels for employees to obtain information
and guidance in resolving ethics concerns.
• Implement companywide ethics-awareness and education programs.
Employee accessibility to ethics information and guidance was available
through managers, ethics officers, and an ethics hotline.
Major ethics cases were defined as those situations potentially involving
serious violations of company policies or illegal conduct. Examples of
major ethics cases included cover-up of defective workmanship or use Describes
of defective parts in products; discrimination in hiring and promotion; in- scope
volvement in monetary or other kickbacks; sexual harassment; disclosure
of proprietary or company information; theft; and use of corporate Inter-
net resources for inappropriate purposes, such as conducting personal
business, gambling, or access to pornography.
1
FIGUREF–5. Formal Report(continued) (Executive Summary)

=== Page 239 ===
6860ch0F.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 206
206 formal reports
Reported Ethics Cases—2008
Minor ethics cases were defined as including all reported con-
cerns not classified as major ethics cases. Minor ethics cases were
classified as informational queries from employees, situations
involving coworkers, and situations involving management.
F
The effectiveness of CGF’s Ethics Program during the first year
of implementation is most evidenced by (1) the active partici- Summarizes
pation of employees in the program and the 3,458 contacts conclusions
employees made regarding ethics concerns through the various
channels available to them, and (2) the action taken in the cases
reported by employees, particularly the disposition of the 30 sub-
stantiated major ethics cases. Disseminating information about
the disposition of ethics cases, particularly information about the
severe disciplinary actions taken in major ethics violations, sends
a message to employees that unethical or illegal conduct will not
be tolerated.
Includes Based on these conclusions, recommendations for planning the
recommen- second year of the Ethics Program are (1) continuing the channels
dations of communication now available in the Ethics Program, (2) in-
creasing financial and technical support for the Ethics Hotline, the
most highly used mode of contact in the ethics cases reported in
2008, (3) disseminating this report in some form to employees
to ensure their awareness of CGF’s commitment to uphold its
Ethics Policies and Procedures, and (4) implementing some
measure of recognition for ethical behavior, such as an “Ethics
Employee of the Month” award to promote and reward ethical
conduct.
Executive
summary
is about
10 percent
of report
length
2
FIGUREF–5. Formal Report(continued) (Executive Summary)

=== Page 240 ===
6860ch0F.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 207
formal reports 207
Reported Ethics Cases—2008
INTRODUCTION
This report examines the nature and disposition of the 3,458 ethics cases
handled companywide by CGF’s ethics officers and managers during
2008. The purpose of this report is to provide the Ethics and Business Opening
F
Conduct Committee with the information necessary for assessing the ef- states
fectiveness of the first year of CGF’s Ethics Program. Recommendations purpose
are given for the Committee’s consideration in planning for the second
year of the Ethics Program.
Ethics and Business Conduct Policies and Procedures Subheads
signal
Effective January 1, 2008, the Ethics and Business Conduct Committee shifts
(the Committee) implemented Policy CGF-EP-01 and Procedure CGF- in topic
EP-02 for the administration of CGF’s new Ethics Program. The purpose
of the Ethics Program, established by the Committee, is to “promote ethi-
cal business conduct through open communication and compliance with
company ethics standards” (CGF, “Ethics and Conduct”).
The Office of Ethics and Business Conduct was created to administer the
Ethics Program. The director of the Office of Ethics and Business Con-
duct, along with seven ethics officers throughout CGF, was given the
responsibility for the following objectives:
• Communicate the values, standards, and goals of CGF’s Ethics Pro-
gram to employees.
• Inform employees about company ethics policies.
• Provide companywide channels for employee education and guidance List
inresolving ethics concerns. identifies
key points
• Implement companywide programs in ethics awareness, education,
and recognition.
• Ensure confidentiality in all ethics matters.
Employee accessibility to ethics information and guidance became the
immediate and key goal of the Office of Ethics and Business Conduct in
its first year of operation. The following channels for contact were set in
motion during 2008:
3
FIGUREF–5. Formal Report(continued) (Introduction)

=== Page 241 ===
6860ch0F.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 208
208 formal reports
Reported Ethics Cases—2008
• Managers throughout CGF received intensive ethics training; in all
ethics situations, employees were encouraged to go to their managers
as the first point of contact.
• Ethics officers were available directly to employees through face-
F
to-face or telephone contact, to managers, to callers using the Ethics
Hotline, and by e-mail.
• The Ethics Hotline was available to all employees, 24 hours a day,
seven days a week, to anonymously report ethics concerns.
Confidentiality Issues
CGF’s Ethics Policy ensures confidentiality and anonymity for employ-
ees who raise genuine ethics concerns. Procedure CGF-EP-02 guarantees
appropriate discipline, up to and including dismissal, for retaliation or
retribution against any employee who properly reports any genuine ethics
concern.
Documentation of Ethics Cases
The following requirements were established by the director of the Office
of Ethics and Business Conduct as uniform guidelines for the documenta-
tion by managers and ethics officers of all reported ethics cases:
• Name, position, and department of individual initiating contact, if
available
Includes • Date and time of contact
detailed
• Name, position, and department of contact person
methods
• Category of ethics case
• Mode of contact
• Resolution
Managers and ethics officers entered the required information in each
reported ethics case into an ACCESS database file, enabling efficient
retrieval and analysis of the data.
4
FIGUREF–5. Formal Report(continued) (Introduction)

=== Page 242 ===
6860ch0F.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 209
formal reports 209
Reported Ethics Cases—2008
Major/Minor Category Definition and Examples
Major ethics cases were defined as those situations potentially involving
serious violations of company policies or illegal conduct. Procedure CGF-
EP-02 requires notification of the Internal Audit and the Law departments F
in serious ethics cases. The staffs of the Internal Audit and the Law de-
partments assume primary responsibility for managing major ethics cases
and for working with the employees, ethics officers, and managers in-
volved in each case.
Examples of situations categorized as major ethics cases:
• Cover-up of defective workmanship or use of defective parts in
products
• Discrimination in hiring and promotion
Organized
• Involvement in monetary or other kickbacks from customers for
by decreas-
preferred orders ing order of
importance
• Sexual harassment
• Disclosure of proprietary customer or company information
• Theft
• Use of corporate Internet resources for inappropriate purposes,
such as conducting private business, gambling, or gaining access
to pornography
Minor ethics cases were defined as including all reported concerns not
classified as major ethics cases. Minor ethics cases were classified as
follows:
• Informational queries from employees
• Situations involving coworkers
• Situations involving management
5
FIGUREF–5. Formal Report(continued) (Introduction)

=== Page 243 ===
6860ch0F.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 210
210 formal reports
Reported Ethics Cases—2008
ANALYSIS OF REPORTED ETHICS CASES
Reported Ethics Cases, by Major/Minor Category
F CGF ethics officers and managers companywide handled a total
Text of 3,458 ethics situations during 2008. Of these cases, only 172,
introduces or 5 percent, involved reported concerns of a serious enough na-
figure ture to be classified as major ethics cases (see Figure 1). Major
ethics cases were defined as those situations potentially involving
serious violations of company policy or illegal conduct.
Number of Cases
Major 172 5%
Minor 3,286 Major Category
Total 3,458
95%
Minor Category
Source: CGF Office of Ethics and Business Conduct.
Number
and title Figure 1. Reported ethics cases, by major/minor category in 2008.
identify
figure
Major Ethics Cases
Of the 172 major ethics cases reported during 2008, 57 percent,
upon investigation, were found to involve unsubstantiated con-
cerns. Incomplete information or misinformation most frequently
was discovered to be the cause of the unfounded concerns of mis-
conduct in 98 cases. Forty-four cases, or 26 percent of the total
cases reported, involved incidents partly substantiated by ethics
6
FIGUREF–5. Formal Report(continued) (Body)

=== Page 244 ===
6860ch0F.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 211
formal reports 211
Reported Ethics Cases—2008
officers as serious misconduct; however, these cases were discov-
ered to also involve inaccurate information or unfounded issues of
misconduct.
Only 17 percent of the total number of major ethics cases, or 30 F
cases, were substantiated as major ethics situations involving seri-
ous ethical misconduct or illegal conduct (CGF, “2008 Ethics
Hotline Results”) (see Figure 2).
Unsubstantiated Cases 98
Partly Substantiated Cases 44
Substantiated Cases 30
Total Major Cases 172
26% Partly
Substantiated
57%
Unsubstantiated
17%
Substantiated
Identifies
Source: CGF Office of Ethics and Business Conduct. source of
information
Figure 2. Major ethics cases in 2008.
Of the 30 substantiated major ethics cases, seven remain under in-
vestigation at this time, and two cases are currently in litigation.
Disposition of the remainder of the 30 substantiated reported
ethics cases included severe disciplinary action in five cases: the
dismissal of two employees and the demotion of three employees.
Seven employees were given written warnings, and nine employ-
ees received verbal warnings (see Figure 3).
7
FIGUREF–5. Formal Report(continued) (Body)

=== Page 245 ===
6860ch0F.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 212
212 formal reports
Reported Ethics Cases—2008
2
7 2
Employee Dismissal
F 3
Employee Demotion
Employee Written Warning
Employee Verbal Warning
9 7 Case Pending
Total Substantiated Case Currently in Litigation
Cases = 30
Source: CGF Office of Ethics and Business Conduct.
Figure 3. Disposition of substantiated major ethics cases
in 2008.
Minor Ethics Cases
Minor ethics cases included those that did not involve serious violations
of company policy or illegal conduct. During 2008, ethics officers and
company managers handled 3,286 such cases. Minor ethics cases were
further classified as follows:
• Informational queries from employees
Reports
findings • Situations involving coworkers
in detail
• Situations involving management
As might be expected during the initial year of the Ethics Program
implementation, the majority of contacts made by employees were in-
formational, involving questions about the new policies and procedures.
These informational contacts comprised 65 percent of all contacts of a
minor nature and numbered 2,148. Employees made 989 contacts regard-
ing ethics concerns involving coworkers and 149 contacts regarding
ethics concerns involving management (see Figure 4).
8
FIGUREF–5. Formal Report(continued) (Body)

=== Page 246 ===
6860ch0F.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 213
formal reports 213
Reported Ethics Cases—2008
5%
Informational 2,148
30% Involving Coworkers 989
Involving Management 149
Total Cases 3,286 F
65% Informational
Situation Involving Coworkers
Situation Involving Management
Source: CGF Office of Ethics and Business Conduct.
Figure 4. Minor ethics cases in 2008.
Mode of Contact
The effectiveness of the Ethics Program rested on the dissemination
of information to employees and the provision of accessible channels Assesses
through which employees could gain information, report concerns, and findings
obtain guidance. Employees were encouraged to first go to their man-
agers with any ethical concerns, because those managers would have the
most direct knowledge of the immediate circumstances and individuals
involved.
Other channels were put into operation, however, for any instance in
which an employee did not feel able to go to his or her manager. The
ethics officers companywide were available to employees through tele-
phone conversations, face-to-face meetings, and e-mail contact. Ethics
officers also served as contact points for managers in need of support
and assistance in handling the ethics concerns reported to them by their
subordinates.
The Ethics Hotline became operational in mid-January 2008 and offered
employees assurance of anonymity and confidentiality. The Ethics Hot-
line was accessible to all employees on a 24-hour, 7-day basis. Ethics
officers companywide took responsibility on a rotational basis for
handling calls reported through the hotline.
9
FIGUREF–5. Formal Report(continued) (Body)

=== Page 247 ===
6860ch0F.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 214
214 formal reports
Reported Ethics Cases—2008
In summary, ethics information and guidance were available to all
employees during 2008 through the following channels:
• Employee to manager
F • Employee telephone, face-to-face, and e-mail contact with ethics
officer
• Manager to ethics officer
• Employee Hotline
Bulleted The mode of contact in the 3,458 reported ethics cases was as follows
lists help or- (see Figure 5):
ganize and
summarize • In 19 percent of the reported cases, or 657, employees went to
information managers with concerns.
• In 9 percent of the reported cases, or 311, employees contacted an
ethics officer.
• In 5 percent of the reported cases, or 173, managers sought assistance
from ethics officers.
• In 67 percent of the reported cases, or 2,317, contacts were made
through the Ethics Hotline.
5%
9%
Ethics Hotline
19% Employee to Manager
Employee to Ethics Officer
67% Manager to Ethics Officer
Source: CGF Office of Ethics and Business Conduct.
Figure 5. Mode of contact in reported ethics cases in 2008.
10
FIGUREF–5. Formal Report(continued) (Body)

=== Page 248 ===
6860ch0F.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 215
formal reports 215
Reported Ethics Cases—2008
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The effectiveness of CGF’s Ethics Program during the first year of imple-
mentation is most evidenced by (1) the active participation of employees Pulls
in the program and the 3,458 contacts employees made regarding ethics together
F
concerns through the various channels available to them, and (2) the ac- findings
tion taken in the cases reported by employees, particularly the disposition
of the 30 substantiated major ethics cases.
One of the 12 steps to building a successful Ethics Program identified by Uses
Frank Navran in Workforcemagazine is an ethics communication strat- sources
egy. Navran explains that such a strategy is crucial in ensuring for
support
that employees have the information they need in a timely and
usable fashion and that the organization is encouraging
employee communication regarding the values, standards and
the conduct of the organization and its members. (Navran 119)
The 3,458 contacts by employees during 2008 attest to the accessibility
and effectiveness of the communication channels that exist in CGF’s
Ethics Program.
An equally important step in building a successful ethics program is
listed by Navran as “Measurements and Rewards,” which he explains
as follows:
In most organizations, employees know what’s important by
virtue of what the organization measures and rewards. If ethical Long quo-
conduct is assessed and rewarded, and if unethical conduct tation in
is identified and dissuaded, employees will believe that the MLA style
organization’s principals mean it when they say the values
and code of ethics are important. (Navran 121)
Disseminating information about the disposition of ethics cases, particu-
larly information about the severe disciplinary actions taken in major
ethics violations, sends a message to employees that unethical or illegal Interprets
conduct will not be tolerated. Making public such actions taken in cases findings
of ethical misconduct provides “a golden opportunity to make other
employees aware that the behavior is unacceptable and why” (Ferrell,
Fraedrich, and Ferrell 129).
11
FIGUREF–5. Formal Report(continued) (Conclusions and Recommendations)

=== Page 249 ===
6860ch0F.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 216
216 formal reports
Reported Ethics Cases—2008
With these two points in mind, I offer the following recommenda-
tions for consideration for plans for the Ethics Program’s second
year:
• Continuation of the channels of communication now available
F
in the Ethics Program
• Increased financial and technical support for the Ethics Hot-
Recommends line, the most highly used mode of contact in the reported
specific steps ethics cases in 2008
• Dissemination of this report in some form to employees to en-
sure employees’awareness of CGF’s commitment to uphold
its Ethics Policy and Procedures
• Implementation of some measure of recognition for ethical
behavior, such as an “Ethics Employee of the Month,” to
promote and reward ethical conduct
To ensure that employees see the value of their continued par-
ticipation in the Ethics Program, feedback is essential. The
information in this annual review, in some form, should be pro-
vided to employees. Knowing that the concerns they reported
were taken seriously and resulted in appropriate action by Ethics
Program administrators would reinforce employee involvement
in the program. While the negative consequences of ethical mis-
conduct contained in this report send a powerful message, a
means of communicating the positiverewards of ethical conduct
at CGF should be implemented. Various options for recognition
of employees exemplifying ethical conduct should be considered
and approved.
Links Continuation of the Ethics Program’s successful 2008 operations,
recommen- with the implementation of the above recommendations, should
dations to ensure the continued pursuit of the Ethics Program’s purpose: “to
company promote a positive work environment that encourages open com-
goal
munication regarding ethics and compliance issues and concerns.”
12
FIGUREF–5. Formal Report(continued) (Conclusions and Recommendations)

=== Page 250 ===
6860ch0F.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 217
formal reports 217
Reported Ethics Cases—2008 Section
begins on
a new page
Works Cited
CGF. “Ethics and Conduct at CGF Aircraft Corporation.” 1 Jan.
2008. 11 Feb. 2009 <http://www.cgfac.com/aboutus/ethics F
.html>.
---. “2008 Ethics Hotline Investigation Results.” 15 Jan. 2009. This report
uses MLA
11 Feb. 2009 <http://www.cgfac.com/html/ethics.html>. style
Ferrell, O. C., John Fraedrich, and Linda Ferrell. Business Ethics:
Ethical Decision Making and Cases. Boston: Houghton Mifflin,
2006.
Kelley, Tina. “Corporate Prophets, Charting a Course to Ethical
Profits.” New York Times8 Feb. 1998: BU12.
Navran, Frank. “12 Steps to Building a Best-Practices Ethics
Program.” WorkforceSept. 1997: 117–22.
13
FIGUREF–5. Formal Report(continued) (Works Cited)

=== Page 251 ===
6860ch0F.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 218
218 format
format
Format refers to both the organization of information in a document
and the physical arrangement of information on the page.
In one sense, format refers to the fact that some types of job-related
writing (such as formal reports, proposals, and various types of corre-
spondence) are characterized by conventions that govern the scopeand
placement of information. For example, in formal reports, the table of
F
contentsprecedes the preface but follows the title page and the abstract.
Likewise, although variations exist, parts of letters—such as inside
address, salutation, and complimentary closing—are arranged in stan-
dard patterns. See also e-mailand memos.
Format also refers to the general physical appearance of a finished
document, whether printed or electronic. See also layoutand designand
Web design.
former / latter
Former and latter should be used to refer to only two items in a sen-
tence or paragraph.
(cid:2) The president and his aide emerged from the conference, the
formerlooking nervous and the latterlooking glum.
Because these terms make the reader look to previous material to iden-
tify the reference, however, they complicate reading and are best avoided.
forms
Forms allow you to gather information from respondents in a standard-
ized print or online design that makes it easy for you to tabulate the re-
sponses and evaluate the information. See Figures F–6 and F–7 for two
examples of forms.
ETHICS NOTE Information gathered on forms can be sensitive or per-
sonal, so make sure to present questions in a way that is not invasive or
illegal. Unless otherwise indicated on the form, the person filling out the
form should have the expectation of confidentiality. If you are con-
cerned about issues of confidentiality or legality, check your organiza-
tion’s policy or in a classroom seek your instructor’s advice. ✦

=== Page 252 ===
6860ch0F.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 219
forms 219
104-MSA
Form
Section 125 Flexible Spending Account title
(FSA) Claim Form
Employee Name: _________________________________
Social Security Number: ______-____-_______ Writing
lines
Name of Employer: _______________________________ F
Employee Signature: _______________________________
Complete section below for medical, dental, or vision Instruc-
reimbursement tions
CLAIM TYPE I:MEDICAL CARE ACCOUNT
Amount of Expense Incurred: $____________________________________
Dates of Services: From: ___________________ To: _________________
Complete section below for reimbursement of care for your Instruc-
dependent provided by a child-care facility, an adult dependent- tions
care center, or a caretaker
CLAIM TYPE II:DEPENDENT-CARE ACCOUNT
Amount of Expense Incurred: $____________________________________
Name of Dependent-Care Provider: ________________________________
Provider Social Security or Federal ID Number: ______-____-_______
Mail or fax form with documentation to:
Specialized Benefit Services,Inc.
P.O.Box 498 Mailing and con-
Framingham,MA 01702 tactinformation
Fax:(508) 877-1182
For additional claim forms:www.sbsclaims.com
FIGUREF–6. Form (for a Medical Claim)

=== Page 253 ===
6860ch0F.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 220
220 forms
Register for Facebook
F
Figure F–7. Online Form with Typical Components
Preparing a Form
An effective form makes it easy for one person to supply information
and for another person to retrieve, record, and interpret that informa-
tion. Ideally, a form should be self-explanatory to someone seeing it for
the first time. When preparing a form, determine the kind of informa-
tion you are seeking and arrange the questions in a logical order. To en-
sure the usability of the form, test it with those from your target
audienceor others before publishing the final version. See also question-
nairesand usability testing.
Choosing Online or Paper. Many organizations provide their forms
not only on paper and as downloadable documents but also as inter-

=== Page 254 ===
6860ch0F.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 221
forms 221
active online forms. Forms especially well suited for online use include
job applications, conference or seminar registrations, and order forms.
Online forms standardize respondents’ interfaces and link to databases
that tabulate and interpret data. An online form can be programmed to
ensure that all necessary fields are completed correctly before the form
can be successfully submitted. Using online forms can eliminate the
problems associated with distributing and collecting forms. However,
using online forms can be difficult for people with limited computer lit-
eracy or access, so consider your audience carefully before opting to F
collect your responses online. See also Web design.
Writing Instructions. Place instructions at the beginning of the form
or at the beginning of each section of the form and use headings or
other design elements, such as the boldface type and shading in Figure
F–6, to attract the readers’ attention. When necessary, place instructions
for distributing the copies of multiple-copy forms at the bottom of each
page of the form. Instructions for submitting printed forms should be
clearly indicated, as in Figure F–6. For printed forms, include space for
a signature and a date. At the end of online forms, include a “submit”
button that is programmed to record the data and to open a new page
or send a confirming e-mail informing respondents that their responses
have been successfully submitted.
Choosing Response Types. Forms should ask questions in ways that are
best suited to the types of data you hope to collect. The two main types
are open-ended questions and closed-ended questions.
• Open-ended questionsallow respondents to answer questions in
their own words. Such questions are most appropriate if you wish
to elicit responses you may not have anticipated (as in a complaint
form) or if there are too many possible answers to use a multiple-
choice format. However, the responses to open-ended questions
can be difficult to tabulate and analyze.
• Closed-ended questionsprovide a list of options from which the
respondent can select, limiting the range of possible responses.
When you want to make sure you receive a standardized, easy-to-
tabulate response, use any of the types of closed-ended questions
that follow:
• Multiple choice: Choose one (or sometimes more) from a preset
list of options.
• Ranked choice: Rank items according to preference, such as se-
lecting vacation days or choosing job assignments.
• Forced choice: Choose between two preset options, such as
yes/no or male/female.

=== Page 255 ===
6860ch0F.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 222
222 forms
Wording Questions. Questions are normally presented as short
phrases or labels. Keep them brief, specific, and to the point; avoid un-
necessary repetition by combining related information under an explan-
atory heading.
WORDY What make of car (or vehicle) do you drive? ___________
What year was it manufactured? _____________________
What model is it? ___________________________________
F
What is the body style? ______________________________
CONCISE Vehicle Information
Make ______________Year _____________
Model _____________Body Style _____________
If a requested date is other than the date on which the form is being
filled out, the label should read, for example, “Effective date” or “Date
issued,” rather than simply “Date.” As in all writing, put yourself in
your reader’s place and imagine what sort of requests would be clear.
Sequencing Entries. The main portion of the form includes the entries
that are required to obtain the necessary data. Arrange entries in an
order that will be the most logical to the person filling out the form.
• Sequence entries to fit the subject matter. For instance, a form re-
questing reimbursement for travel expenses would logically begin
with the first day of the week (or month) and end with the last day
of the appropriate period.
• If the response to one item is based on the response to another
item, be sure the items appear in the correct order.
• Group requests for related information together whenever possible.
• For ease of reading, arrange entries from left to right and from
top to bottom.
Designing a Form
At the top of the form, clearly indicate preliminary information, such as
the name of your organization, the title of your form, and any reference
number. You can design computer-generated forms specific to your
needs with form-design software, word-processing software, or markup
languages (such as HTML or XML). However you prepare the final
version of a form, pay particular attention to design details, especially
to the placement of entry lines, labels, and the amount of space allowed
for responses.
Entry Lines and Fields. A print form can be designed so that the person
filling it out provides information on a writing line, in a writing block,

=== Page 256 ===
6860ch0F.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 223
forms 223
or in square boxes. A writing line is simply a rule with a caption, such
as the line for “Employee Name” shown in Figure F–6. A writing block
is essentially the same as a writing line, except that each entry is en-
closed in a ruled block, as shown in Figure F–8, making it unlikely for
the respondent to associate a caption with the wrong line.
F
NAME TELEPHONE
STREET ADDRESS
CITY STATE ZIP CODE
FIGUREF–8. Writing Block for a Form
When it is possible to anticipate all likely responses, you can make
the form easy to fill out by writing the question on the form, supplying
a labeled box for each anticipated answer, and asking the respondent to
check the appropriate boxes. Such a design also makes it easy to tabu-
late the data. Be sure your questions are both simple and specific.
(cid:2) Would your department order another X2L Copier? Yes □ No □
For online forms, these functions are accomplished with form fields
such as text boxes, option (or “radio”) buttons, drop-down menus,
lists, and checkboxes, which can be aligned using table cells or group-
ing. Each form field should have a label prompting users to type infor-
mation or select from a list of options. Labels for text boxes, drop-down
menus, and lists should be positioned to the left; labels for radio but-
tons and checkboxes should be positioned to the right. Be sure as well
to indicate required form fields. See Figure F–7 for an example of spac-
ing and alignment in an online form.*
Spacing. Provide enough space to enable the person filling out the
form to enter the requested information. Insufficient writing or typing
space makes it difficult for people to respond, resulting in responses
that are hard to read, abbreviated, or incomplete. Reading responses
that are too tightly spaced or that snake around the side of the form can
cause errors when tabulating or interpreting data.
*For up-to-date information on designing online forms, see www.stcsig.org/usability/
topics/forms.html.

=== Page 257 ===
6860ch0F.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 224
224 fortuitous / fortunate
fortuitous / fortunate
When an event is fortuitous, it happens by chance or accident and with-
out plan. Such an event may be lucky, unlucky, or neutral.
(cid:2) My encounter with the client in Denver was entirely fortuitous;
I had no idea he was there.
When an event is fortunate, it happens by good fortune or happens
F
favorably.
(cid:2) Our chance meeting had a fortunateoutcome.
fragments (see sentence fragments)
functional shift
Many words shift easily from one partof speech to another, depending
on how they are used. When they do, the process is called a functional
shift, or a shift in function.
(cid:2) It takes ten minutes to walkfrom the laboratory to the emergency
room. However, the long walkreduces efficiency.
[Walkshifts from verbto noun.]
(cid:2) I talk to the Chicago office on the phoneevery day. He was con-
cerned about the office phoneexpenses. He will phonethe home
office from London.
[Phoneshifts from noun to adjectiveto verb.]
(cid:2) Afterwe discuss the project, we will begin work. Afterlengthy
discussions, we began work. The partners worked well together
forever after.
[Aftershifts from conjunctionto prepositionto adverb.]
Jargon is often the result of functional shifts. In hospitals, for example,
an attending physician is often referred to simply as the “attending” (a
shift from an adjective to a noun). Likewise, in nuclear plant construc-
tion, a reactor containment building is called a “containment” (a shift
from an adjective to a noun). Do not shift the function of a word indis-
criminately merely to shorten a phrase or an expression. See also affec-
tation, audience, and conciseness.

=== Page 258 ===
6860ch0G.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 225
G
garbled sentences
G
A garbled sentence is one that is so tangled with structural and gram-
matical problems that it cannot be repaired. Garbled sentences often re-
sult from an attempt to squeeze too many ideas into one sentence.
(cid:2) My job objectives are accomplished by my having a diversified
background which enables me to operate effectively and efficiently,
consisting of a degree in computer science, along with twelve years
of experience, including three years in Staff Engineering-Packaging
sets a foundation for a strong background in areas of analyzing
problems and assessing economical and reasonable solutions.
Do not try to patch such a sentence; rather, analyze the ideas it con-
tains, list them in a logical sequence, and then construct one or more
entirely new sentences. An analysis of the preceding example yields the
following five ideas:
• My job requires that I analyze problems to find economical and
workable solutions.
• My diversified background helps me accomplish my job.
• I have a computer-science degree.
• I have twelve years of job experience.
• Three of these years have been in Staff Engineering-Packaging.
Using those five ideas—together with parallel structure, sentence vari-
ety, subordination, and transition—the writer might have described the
job as follows:
(cid:2) My job requires that I analyze problems to find economical and
workable solutions. Both my education and experience help me
achieve this goal. Specifically, I have a computer-science degree and
twelve years of job experience, three of which have been in the
Staff Engineering-Packaging Department.
See also clarity, mixed constructions, and sentence construction.
225

=== Page 259 ===
6860ch0G.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 226
226 gender
gender
In English grammar, gender refers to the classification of nouns and
pronounsas masculine, feminine, and neuter. The gender of most words
can be identified only by the choice of the appropriate pronoun (he, she,
it). Only these pronouns and a select few nouns (buck/doe) or noun
forms (heir/heiress) reflect gender. Many such nouns have been replaced
by single terms for both sexes. See also biased languageand he / she.
Gender is important to writers because they must be sure that
nouns and pronouns within a grammatical construction agree in gender.
G
A pronoun, for example, must agree with its noun antecedent in gender.
We refer to a woman as sheor her, not as it; to a man as heor him, not
as it; to a building as it, not as heor she. See also agreement.
ESL TIPfor Assigning Gender
The English language has an almost complete lack of gender distinc-
tions.Thatcan be confusing for a nonnative speaker of English whose
native language may assign gender.In the few cases in which English
does make a gender distinction, there is a close connection between
the assigning of gender and the sex of the subject.The few instances in
which gender distinctions are made in English are summarized as
follows:
Subjectpronouns he/she
Objectpronouns him/her
Possessive adjectives his/her(s)
Some nouns king/queen,boy/girl,bull/cow,etc.
When a noun,such as doctor,can refer to a person of either sex,you
need to know the sex of the person to which the noun refers to deter-
mine the gender-appropriate pronoun.
(cid:2) The doctor gave herpatients advice.
[Doctor is female.]
(cid:2) The doctor gave hispatients advice.
[Doctor is male.]
When the sex of the noun antecedentis unknown,be sure to follow the
guidelines for nonsexist writing in the entry biased language. (Note:
Some English speakers refer to vehicles and countries as she, but
contemporary usage favors it.)

=== Page 260 ===
6860ch0G.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 227
general and specific methods of development 227
general and specific methods
of development
General and specific methods of development organize information ei-
ther from general points to specific details or from specific details to a
general conclusion. As with all methods of development, rarely does a
writer rely on only one method throughout a document. Most docu-
ments blend methods and use combinations of methods.
General to Specific
G
The general-to-specific development (see Figure G–1) is especially useful
for teaching readers about something with which they are not familiar
because you can begin with generally known information and lead to
new and increasingly specific details. This method can also be used to
support a general statement with facts or examples that validate the
statement. For example, if you begin your writing with the general
statement “Companies that diversify are more successful than those that
do not,” you could follow that statement with examples and statistics
Subject: Expanding Our Supplier Base for Computer Chips
On the basis of information presented at the supply meeting on
April 14, we recommend that the company initiate relationships General
with computer-chip manufacturers. Several events make such an statement
action necessary.
Our current supplier, Datacom, is experiencing growing
pains and is having difficulty shipping the product on time.
Specifically, we can expect a reduction of between 800 and 1,000 Supporting
units per month for the remainder of this fiscal year. The number information
of units should stabilize at 15,000 units per month thereafter.
Domestic demand for our computers continues to grow. De-
mand during the current fiscal year is up 500,000 units over the Specific
last fiscal year. Our sales projections for the next five years show details
that demand should peak next year at about 830,000 units given
the consumer demand, which will increase exponentially.
Finally, our expansion into the Czech Republic and
Kazakhstan markets will require additional shipments of at least
175,000 units per quarter for the remainder of this fiscal year.
Sales Department projections put global computer sales at double
that rate, or 350,000 units per fiscal year, for the next five years.
FIGUREG–1. General-to-Specific Method of Development

=== Page 261 ===
6860ch0G.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 228
228 global communication
that prove to the reader that companies that diversify are, in fact, more
successful than companies that do not.
A memo or short report organized entirely in a general-to-specific
sequence discusses only one point. All other information in the docu-
ment supports the general statement, as in Figure G–1 from a memo
about locating additional computer-chip suppliers.
Specific to General
Specific-to-general development is especially useful when you wish to
persuade skeptical readers of a general principle with an accumulation
G
of specific details and evidence that reach a logical conclusion. It care-
fully builds its case, often with examples and analogies in addition to
facts or statistics, and does not actually make its point until the end.
(See also order-of-importance method of development.) Figure G–2 is an
example of the specific-to-general method of development.
Recently, a government agency studied the use of passenger-side
Specific air bags in 4,500 accidents involving nearly 7,200 front-seat
details passengers of the vehicles involved. Nearly all the accidents oc-
curred on routes that had a speed limit of at least 40 mph. Only
20 percent of the adult front-seat passengers were riding in ve-
hicles equipped with passenger-side air bags. Those riding in
vehicles not equipped with passenger-side air bags were more
than twice as likely to be killed as passengers riding in vehicles
that were so equipped.
A conservative estimate is that 40 percent of the adult front-
seat passenger-vehicle deaths could be prevented if all vehicles
came equipped with passenger-side air bags. Children, however,
should always ride in the backseat because other studies have
indicated that a child can be killed by the deployment of an air
General bag. If you are an adult front-seat passenger in an accident, your
conclusion chances of survival are far greater if the vehicle in which you are
riding is equipped with a passenger-side air bag.
FIGURE G–2. Specific-to-General Method of Development
global communication
The prevalence of global communication technology and international
markets means that the ability to communicate with audiences from
varied cultural backgrounds is essential. The audiences for such com-

=== Page 262 ===
6860ch0G.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 229
global communication 229
munications include clients and customers as well as business partners
and colleagues.
Many entries in this book, such as meetings and résumés, are
based on U.S. cultural patterns. The treatment of such topics might be
very different in other cultures where leadership styles, persuasive
strategies, and even legal constraints differ. As illustrated in interna-
tional correspondence, organizational patterns, forms of courtesy, and
ideas about efficiency can vary significantly from culture to culture.
What might be seen as direct and efficient in the United States could be
considered blunt and even impolite in other cultures. The reasons be-
hind these differing ways of viewing communication are complex. Re- G
searchers have found various ways to measure cultural differences
through such concepts as the importance of saving face, perceptions of
time, and individual versus group orientation.
Anthropologist Edward T. Hall, a pioneer in cross-cultural re-
search, developed the concept of “contexting” to assess the predomi-
nant communication style of a culture.* By contexting, Hall means how
much or how little an individual assumes another person understands
about a subject under discussion. In a very low-context communication,
the participants assume they share little knowledge and must communi-
cate in great detail. Low-context cultures tend to assume little prior
knowledge on the part of those with whom they communicate; thus,
thorough documentation is important—written agreements (contracts)
are expected, and rules are explicitly defined.
In a high-context communication, the participants assume they un-
derstand the context and thus depend on shared history (context) to
communicate with each other. Thus, communications such as written
contracts are not so important, while communication that relies on per-
sonal relationships and shared history is paramount. Of course, no cul-
ture is entirely high or low context; rather, these concepts can help you
communicate more effectively to those in a particular culture.†
WRITER’S CHECKLIST Communicating Globally
(cid:3)
Acknowledge diversity within your organization.Discussing the dif-
fering cultures within your company or region will reinforce the idea
thatpeople can interpretverbal and nonverbal communications
differently.
*Edward Twitchell Hall and Mildred Reed Hall, Understanding Cultural Differ-
ences: Germans, French and Americans(Yarmouth, Maine: Intercultural Press, 1990).
†For an example of how contexting functions in a particular culture, see Gerald J.
Alred, “Teaching in Germany and the Rhetoric of Culture,” Journal of Business and
Technical Communication11.3 (July 1997): 353–78.

=== Page 263 ===
6860ch0G.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 230
230 global graphics
Writer’s Checklist:Communicating Globally (continued)
(cid:3)
Invite global and intercultural communication experts to speak at
your workplace.Companies in your area may have employees who
could be resources for cultural discussions.
(cid:3)
Understand thatthe key to effective communication with global
audiences is recognizing thatcultural differences,despite the chal-
lenges they may present,offer opportunities for growth for both you
and your organization.
(cid:3)
Consultwith someone from your intended audience’s culture.Many
G phrases,gestures,and visual elements are so subtle thatonly some-
one who is very familiar with the culture can explain the effectthey
may have on others from thatculture.See also global graphics.
WEB LINK Intercultural Resources
Intercultural Press publishes “books and training materials thathelp
professionals,businesspeople,travelers,and scholars understand the
meaning and diversity of culture.”(See www.interculturalpress.com.) For
other resources for global communication,see bedfordstmartins.com/
alredtechand selectLinks for Handbook Entries.
global graphics
In a global business and technological environment, graphs and other
visuals require the same careful attention given to other aspects of
global communication. The complex cultural connotations of visuals
challenge writers to think beyond their own experience when they are
aiming for audiences outside their own culture.
Symbols, images, and even colors are not free from cultural associ-
ations—they depend on context, and context is culturally determined.
For instance, in North America, a red cross is commonly used as a sym-
bol for first aid or a hospital. In Muslim countries, however, a cross (red
or otherwise) represents Christianity, whereas a crescent (usually green)
signifies first aid or a hospital. A manual for use in Honduras could in-
dicate “caution” by using a picture of a person touching a finger below
the eye. In France, however, using that gesture would mean “You can’t
fool me.”
Figure G–3 shows two different graphics depicting weight lifters.
The drawing at the left may be appropriate for U.S. audiences and oth-

=== Page 264 ===
6860ch0G.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 231
global graphics 231
G
FIGUREG–3. Graphics for U.S.(left) and Global (right) Audiences
ers. However, that image would be highly inappropriate in many cul-
tures where the image of a partially clothed man and woman in close
proximity would be contrary to deeply held cultural beliefs and even
laws about the public depiction of men and women. The drawing at the
right in Figure G–3, however, depicts a weight lifter by using a neutral
icon that avoids the connotations associated with more realistic images
of people.
These examples suggest why the International Organization for
Standardization (ISO) established agreed-upon symbols, such as those
shown in Figure G–4, designed for public signs, guidebooks, and man-
uals.
FIGURE G–4. International Organization for Standardization Symbols

=== Page 265 ===
6860ch0G.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 232
232 global graphics
Careful attention to the connotations that visual elements may have
for a global audiencemakes translations easier, prevents embarrassment,
and earns respect for a company and its products and services. See also
connotation / denotation.
WRITER’S CHECKLIST CommunicatingwithGlobalGraphics
(cid:3)
Consultwith someone or testyour use of graphics with people from
your intended audience’s country who understand the effectthatvi-
G sual elements will have on readers or listeners.See also presentations
and usability testing.
(cid:3)
Organize visual information for the intended audience.For example,
North Americans read visuals from leftto rightin clockwise rotation.
Middle Eastern readers typically read visuals from rightto leftin
counterclockwise rotation.
(cid:3)
Be sure thatthe graphics have no unintended religious
implications.
(cid:3)
Carefully consider how you depictpeople in visuals.Nudity in
advertising,for example,may be acceptable in some cultures,but
in others showing even isolated bare body parts can alienate
audiences.
(cid:3)
Use outlines or neutral abstractions to representhuman beings.For
example,use stick figures and avoid representing men and women.
(cid:3)
Examine how you display body positions in signs and visuals.
Body positioning can carry unintended cultural meanings very dif-
ferentfrom your own.For example,some Middle Eastern cultures
regard the display of the soles of one’s shoes to be disrespectful and
offensive.
(cid:3)
Choose neutral colors (or those you know are appropriate) for your
graphics;generally,black-and-white and gray-and-white illustrations
work well.Colors can be problematic.For example,in North America,
Europe,and Japan,red indicates danger.In China,however,red sym-
bolizes good fortune and joy.
(cid:3)
Check your use of punctuation marks,which are as language specific
as symbols.For example,in North America,the question mark gener-
ally represents the need for information or the help function in a
computer manual or program.In many countries,thatsymbol has
no meaning atall.
(cid:3)
Create simple visuals and use consistentlabels for all visual items.
In mostcultures,simple shapes with fewer elements are easier to
read.

=== Page 266 ===
6860ch0G.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 233
gobbledygook 233
glossaries
A glossary is an alphabetical list of definitions of specialized terms used
in a formal report, a manual, or other long document. You may want to
include a glossary if some readers in your audience are not familiar
with specialized or technical terms you use.
Keep glossary entries concise and be sure they are written in lan-
guage that all your readers can understand.
(cid:2) Amplitude modulation:Varying the amplitude of a carrier current
with an audio-frequency signal. G
Arrange the terms alphabetically, with each entry beginning on a new
line. The definitions then follow the terms, dictionary style. In a formal
report, the glossary begins on a new page and appears after the appen-
dix(es) and bibliography.
Including a glossary does not relieve you of the responsibility of
defining terms that your reader will not know when those terms are
first mentioned in the text.
gobbledygook
Gobbledygook is writing that suffers from an overdose of traits guaran-
teed to make it stuffy, pretentious, and wordy. Such traits include the
overuse of big and mostly abstract words, affectation (especially long
variants), buzzwords, clichés, euphemisms, inappropriate jargon, stacked
modifiers, and vague words. Gobbledygook is writing that attempts to
sound official (officialese), legal (legalese), or scientific; it tries to make a
“natural elevation of the geosphere’s outer crust” out of a molehill. Con-
sider the following statement from an auto-repair release form.
LEGALESE I hereby authorize the above repair work to be done
along with the necessary material and hereby grant you
and/or your employees permission to operate the car or
truck herein described on streets, highways, or elsewhere
for the purpose of testing and/or inspection. An express
mechanic’s lien is hereby acknowledged on above car or
truck to secure the amount of repairs thereto.
DIRECT You have my permission to do the repair work listed on
this work order and to use the necessary material. You
may drive my vehicle to test its performance. I under-
stand that you will keep my vehicle until I have paid for
all repairs.
See also clarity, conciseness, and word choice.

=== Page 267 ===
6860ch0G.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 234
234 good / well
good / well
Goodis an adjective, and wellis an adverb.
ADJECTIVE Janet presented a goodplan.
ADVERB She presented the plan well.
Well also can be used as an adjective to describe health (a well child,
wellnessprograms). See also bad / badly.
G
grammar
Grammar is the systematic description of the way words work together
to form a coherent language. In that sense, it is an explanation of the
structure of a language. However, grammar is popularly taken to mean
the set of rules that governs how a language ought to be spoken and
written. In that sense, it refers to the usageconventions of a language.
Those two meanings of grammar—how the language functions
and how it ought to function—are easily confused. To clarify the dis-
tinction, consider the expression ain’t. Unless used intentionally to add
colloquial flavor, ain’tis unacceptable because its use is considered non-
standard. Yet taken strictly as a partof speech, the term functions per-
fectly well as a verb. Whether it appears in a declarative sentence (“I
ain’tgoing”) or an interrogative sentence (“Ain’tI going?”), it conforms
to the normal pattern for all verbs in the English language. Although
readers may not approve of its use, they cannot argue that it is ungram-
matical in such sentences.
To achieve clarity, you need to know both grammar (as a descrip-
tion of the way words work together) and the conventions of usage.
Knowing the conventions of usage helps you select the appropriate over
the inappropriate word or expression. (See also word choice.) A knowl-
edge of grammar helps you diagnose and correct problems arising from
how words and phrases function in relation to one another. For example,
knowing that certain words and phrases function to modify other words
and phrases gives you a basis for correcting those modifiersthat are not
doing their job. Understanding dangling modifiers helps you avoid or
correct a construction that obscures the intended meaning. In short, an
understanding of grammar and its special terminology is valuable chiefly
WEB LINK Getting Help with Grammar
For helpful Web sites and grammar exercises,see bedfordstmartins.com/
alredtechand selectLinks for Handbook Entriesand Exercise Central.

=== Page 268 ===
graphs 235
because it enables you to recognize and correct problems so that you
can communicate clearly and precisely. For a complete list of grammar
entries, see the Contents by Topic on the inside front cover.
graphs
A graph presents numerical or quantitative data in visual form and of-
fers several advantages over presenting data within the text or in tables.
Trends, movements, distributions, comparisons, and cycles are more
G
readily apparent in graphs than they are in tables. However, although
graphs present data in a more comprehensible form than tables do, they
are less precise. For that reason, some audiencesmay need graphs to be
accompanied by tables that give exact data. The types of graphs de-
scribed in this entry include line graphs, bar graphs, pie graphs, and pic-
ture graphs. For advice on integrating graphs within text, see visuals;
for information about using presentation graphics, see presentations.
Line Graphs
A line graph shows the relationship between two variables or sets of
numbers by plotting points in relation to two axes drawn at right
angles (see Figure G–5). The vertical axis usually represents amounts,
and the horizontal axis usually represents increments of time. Line
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4
2006 2007 2008 2009
Sales of Models 10.A33 and 12.C19, 2006–2009 (quarterly)
)sdnasuoht
ni(
stinU
fo
rebmuN
6860ch0G.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 235
Legend
Model 10.A33
Model 12.C19
FIGUREG–5. Double-Line Graph (with Shading)

=== Page 269 ===
6860ch0G.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 236
236 graphs
graphs that portray more than one set of variables (double-line graphs)
allow for comparisons between two sets of data for the same period of
time. You can emphasize the difference between the two lines by shad-
ing the space between them, as shown in Figure G–5.
ETHICS NOTE Be especially careful to proportion the vertical and hori-
zontal scales so that they give a precise presentation of the data that is
free of visual distortion. To do otherwise is not only inaccurate but po-
tentially unethical. (See ethics in writing.) In Figure G–6, the graph on
the left gives the appearance of a dramatic decrease in lab-test failures
because the scale is unevenly compressed, with some of the years selec-
G
tively omitted. The graph on the right represents the trend more accu-
rately because the years are evenly distributed without omissions. ✦
Lab-Test Failures Lab-Test Failures
40 40
35
30 30
25
20 20
15
10 10
5
0 0
2004 2006 2009 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
Figure G–6. Distorted (left) and Distortion-Free (right) Expressions of Data
Bar Graphs
Bar graphs consist of horizontal or vertical bars of equal width, scaled
in length to represent some quantity. They are commonly used to show
(1) quantities of the same item at different times, (2) quantities of different
items at the same time, and (3) quantities of the different parts of an
item that make up a whole (in which case, the segments of the bar
graph must total 100 percent). The horizontal bar graph in Figure G–7
shows the quantities of different items for the same period of time.
Bar graphs can also show the different portions of an item that
make up the whole, as shown in Figure G–8. Such a bar graph is divided

=== Page 270 ===
6860ch0G.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 237
graphs 237
Top 5 Cosmetic Nonsurgical Procedures (2006)
Laser Skin
Resurfacing 576,509
Microdermabrasion 993,071
Laser Hair
Removal 1,475,296
Hyaluronic Acid
1,593,554
(Hylaform®, Restylane®)
Botulinum Toxin
(Botox®, Myobloc®) 3,181,592 G
0 500 1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500 3,000 3,500
Number of Procedures
(in thousands)
Source: American Society for Aesthetic Plastic Surgery.
Figure G–7. Bar Graph (Quantities of DifferentItems During a Fixed Period)
5% Miscellaneous*
5% Sewage*
Trash
10%
Collection*
Street
10%
Maintenance*
Police and Fire
25%
Protection*
45% Salaries
Your Municipal Tax Dollar
*These figures do not include salaries.
FIGUREG–8. Bar (Column) Graph (Showing the Parts ThatMake Up the Whole)

=== Page 271 ===
6860ch0G.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 238
238 graphs
according to the appropriate proportions of the subcomponents of the
item. This type of graph, also called a column graph when constructed
vertically, can indicate multiple items. Where such items represent parts
of a whole, as in Figure G–8, the segments in the bar graph must total
100 percent. Note that in addition to labels, each subdivision of a bar
graph must be marked clearly by color, shading, or crosshatching, with
a key or labels that identify the subdivisions represented. Be aware that
three-dimensional graphs can make sections seem larger than the
amounts they represent.
G Pie Graphs
A pie graph presents data as wedge-shaped sections of a circle. The circle
equals 100 percent, or the whole, of some quantity, and the wedges rep-
resent how the whole is divided. Many times, the data shown in a bar
graph could also be depicted in a pie graph. For example, Figure G–8
shows percentages of a whole in a bar-graph form. In Figure G–9, the
same data are converted into a pie graph, dividing “Your Municipal
Tax Dollar” into wedge-shaped sections that represent percentages. Pie
graphs provide a quicker way of presenting information that can be
Miscellaneous*
Sewage*
Trash
Collection* 5%
5%
10%
Street 45% Salaries
Maintenance* 10%
25%
Police and Fire
Protection*
Your Municipal Tax Dollar
*These figures do not include salaries.
FIGUREG–9. Pie Graph (Showing Percentages of the Whole)

=== Page 272 ===
graphs 239
Top Three Genetically Engineered Crops
in the United States (2003)
80
= 10 million acres
59.7
60
40
31.6
G
20
10
0
Source: National Agriculture Statistics Service/USDA.
shown in a table; in fact, a table with a more-detailed breakdown of the
same information often accompanies a pie graph.
Picture Graphs
Picture graphs are modified bar graphs that use pictorial symbols of the
item portrayed. Each symbol corresponds to a specified quantity of
the item, as shown in Figure G–10. Note that for precision and clarity,
the picture graph includes the total quantity above the symbols.
WRITER’S CHECKLIST Creating Graphs
FOR ALL GRAPHS
(cid:3)
Use,as needed,a key or legend thatlists and defines symbols (see Fig-
ure G–5).
(cid:3)
Include a source line under the graph atthe lower leftwhen the data
come from another source.
(cid:3)
Place explanatory footnotes directly below the figure caption or label
(see Figures G–8 and G–9).
sporc
dereenigne
yllaciteneg
)snoillim
ni
serca(
6860ch0G.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 239
soybeans corn cotton
(81% of total (40% of total (73% of total
soybean crop) corn crop) cotton crop)
FIGUREG–10. Picture Graph

=== Page 273 ===
6860ch0G.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:50 AM Page 240
240 graphs
Writer’s Checklist:Creating Graphs (continued)
FOR LINE GRAPHS
(cid:3)
Indicate the zero pointof the graph (the pointwhere the two axes in-
tersect).
(cid:3)
Inserta break in the scale if the range of data shown makes itincon-
venientto begin atzero.
(cid:3)
Divide the vertical axis into equal portions,from the leastamountat
the bottom (or zero) to the greatestamountatthe top.
G (cid:3) Divide the horizontal axis into equal units from leftto right.If a label
is necessary,center itdirectly beneath the scale.
(cid:3)
Make all lettering read horizontally if possible,although the caption
or label for the vertical axis is usually positioned vertically (see Fig-
ure G–5).
FOR BAR GRAPHS
(cid:3)
Differentiate among the types of data each bar or partof a bar repre-
sents by color,shading,or crosshatching.
(cid:3)
Avoid three-dimensional graphs when they make sections seem
larger than the amounts they represent.
FOR PIE GRAPHS
(cid:3)
Make sure thatthe complete circle is equivalentto 100 percent.
(cid:3)
Sequence the wedges clockwise from largestto smallest,beginning at
the 12 o’clock position,whenever possible.
(cid:3)
Limitthe number of items in the pie graph to avoid clutter and to en-
sure thatthe slices are thick enough to be clear.
(cid:3)
Give each wedge a distinctive color,pattern,shade,or texture.
(cid:3)
Label each wedge with its percentage value and keep all call-outs (la-
bels thatidentify the wedges) horizontal.
(cid:3)
Detach a slice,as shown in Figure G–9,if you wish to draw attention
to a particular segmentof the pie graph.
FOR PICTURE GRAPHS
(cid:3)
Use picture graphs to add interestto presentationsand documents
(such as newsletters) thatare aimed atwide audiences.
(cid:3)
Choose symbols thatare easily recognizable.See also global graphics.
(cid:3)
Leteach symbol representthe same number of units.
(cid:3)
Indicate larger quantities by using more symbols,instead of larger
symbols,because relative sizes are difficultto judge accurately.

=== Page 274 ===
6860ch0H.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:51 AM Page 241
H
he / she
The use of either he or she to refer to both sexes excludes half of the
population. (See also biased language.) To avoid this problem, you
could use the phrases he or sheand his or her. (“Whoever is appointed
will find his or hertask difficult.”) However, he or sheand his or herare H
clumsy when used repeatedly, as are he/she and similar constructions.
One solution is to reword the sentence to use a plural pronoun; if you
do, change the nounsor other pronouns to match the plural form.
Administrators their jobs they understand
(cid:2) The administratorcannot do his or her jobuntil he or she
^ ^ ^
understandsthe organization’s culture.
In other cases, you may be able to avoid using a pronoun altogether.
an
(cid:2) Everyone must submit his or herexpense report by Monday.
^
Of course, a pronoun cannot always be omitted without changing the
meaning of a sentence.
Another solution is to omit troublesome pronouns by using the im-
perative mood.
Submit all s
(cid:2) Everyone must submit his or herexpense report by Monday.
^ ^
headers and footers
A header in a formal report or other document appears at the top of
each page, and a footer appears at the bottom of each page. Although
the information included in headers and footers varies greatly from one
organization to the next, the header and footer shown in Figure H–1
are fairly typical.
Headers or footers should include at least the page number but
may also include the document title, the topic (or subtopic) of a section,
the date of the document, the names of the author or recipients, and
other identifying information to help readers keep track of where they
241

=== Page 275 ===
242 headings
4 Establishing your password
□note: If you entered any fields incorrectly, the
advisory message doesn’t appear. Instead, a message
appears indicating the nature of the error. Correct the
password as indicated by the message. You may also
ask your supervisor for assistance.
H PASSWORD In each Password field, enter your new
password.
□note: For security reasons, the pass-
word does not appear as you type it.
■
Introduction to Using the International Banking System 2/09
are in the document. Keep your headers and footers concise because too
much information in them can create visual clutter. For examples of
headers used in correspondence, see lettersand memos.
headings
Headings (also called heads) are titles or subtitles that highlight the
main topics and signal topic changes within the body of a document.
Headings help readers find information and divide the material into
comprehensible segments. A formal reportor proposalmay need several
levels of headings (as shown in Figure H–2) to indicate major divisions,
subdivisions, and even smaller units. If possible, avoid using more than
four levels of headings. See also layoutand design.
Headings typically represent the major topics of a document. In a
short document, you can use the major divisions of your outline as
headings; in a longer document, you may need to use both major and
minor divisions.
General Heading Style
No one format for headings is correct. Often an organization settles on
a standard format, which everyone in that organization follows. Some-
▲
6860ch0H.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:51 AM Page 242
Header
Footer
FIGURE H–1. Header and Footer

=== Page 276 ===
6860ch0H.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:51 AM Page 243
headings 243
ENGINEERING AND MANUFACTURING First-
PLANTLOCATION REPORT level
head
The committee initially considered 30 possible locations for the
proposed new engineering and manufacturing plant. Of these, 20
were eliminated almost immediately for one reason or another
(unfavorable zoning regulations, inadequate transportation infra-
structure, etc.). Of the remaining ten locations, the committee se-
lected for intensive study the three that seemed most promising:
Chicago, Minneapolis, and Salt Lake City. We have now visited
these three cities, and our observations and recommendations fol-
low.
H
CHICAGO Second-
Of the three cities, Chicago presently seems to the committee to level
offer the greatest advantages, although we wish to examine these head
more carefully before making a final recommendation.
Selected Location Third-
Though not at the geographic center of the United States, level
Chicago is the demographic center to more than three-quarters of head
the U.S. population. It is within easy reach of our corporate head-
quarters in New York. And it is close to several of our most im-
portant suppliers of components and raw materials—those, for
example, in Columbus, Detroit, and St. Louis. Several factors
were considered essential to the location, although some may not
have had as great an impact on the selection....
Air Transportation. Chicago has two major airports (O’Hare Fourth-
and Midway) and is contemplating building a third. Both domes- level
tic and international air-cargo service are available.... heads
Sea Transportation. Except during the winter months when the
Great Lakes are frozen, Chicago is an international seaport....
Rail Transportation. Chicago is served by the following major
railroads....
FIGUREH–2. Headings Used in a Document
times a client for whom a report or proposal is being prepared requires
a particular format. In the absence of specific guidelines, follow the sys-
tem illustrated in Figure H–2.
Decimal Numbering System
Some documents, such as specifications, benefit from the decimal number-
ing system for ease of cross-referencing sections. The decimal numbering

=== Page 277 ===
6860ch0H.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:51 AM Page 244
244 headings
system uses a combination of numbers and decimal points to differenti-
ate among levels of headings. The following example shows the corre-
spondence between different levels of headings and the decimal numbers
used:
1. FIRST-LEVEL HEADING
1.1 Second-level heading
1.2 Second-level heading
1.2.1 Third-level heading
1.2.2 Third-level heading
1.2.2.1 Fourth-level heading
1.2.2.2 Fourth-level heading
H 1.3 Second-level heading
2. FIRST-LEVEL HEADING
Although decimal headings are indented in an outline or a table of con-
tents, they are flush with the left margins when they function as head-
ings in the body of a report. Every heading starts on a new line, with an
extra line of space above and below the heading.
WRITER’S CHECKLIST Using Headings
(cid:4)
Use headings to signal a new topic.Use a lower-level heading to
indicate a new subtopic within the larger topic.
(cid:4)
Make headings concise butspecific enough to be informative,as
in Figure H–2.
(cid:4)
Avoid too many or too few headings or levels of headings;too
many clutter a document,and too few fail to provide recognizable
structure.
(cid:4)
Ensure thatheadings atthe same level are of relatively equal impor-
tance and have parallel structure.
(cid:4)
Subdivide sections only as needed;when you do,try to subdivide
them into atleasttwo lower-level headings.
(cid:4)
Do notleave a heading as the final line of a page.If two lines of text
cannotfitbelow a heading,startthe section atthe top of the next
page.
(cid:4)
Do notallow a heading to substitute for discussion;the textshould
read as if the heading were notthere.

=== Page 278 ===
6860ch0H.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:51 AM Page 245
hyphens 245
hyphens
DIRECTORY
Hyphens with Compound Words 245
Hyphens with Modifiers 245
Hyphens with Prefixes and Suffixes 246
Hyphens and Clarity 246
Other Uses of the Hyphen 246
Writer’s Checklist:Using Hyphens to Divide Words 246
The hyphen (-) is used primarily for linking and separating words and
parts of words. The hyphen often improves the clarity of writing. The H
hyphen is sometimes confused with the dash, which may be indicated
with two consecutive hyphens.
Hyphens with Compound Words
Some compound words are formed with hyphens (able-bodied, over-the-
counter). Hyphens are also used with multiword numbers from twenty-
one through ninety-nine and fractions when they are written out (three-
quarters). Most current dictionaries indicate whether compound words
are hyphenated, written as one word, or written as separate words.
Hyphens with Modifiers
Two- and three-word modifiers that express a single thought are hy-
phenated when they precede a noun.
(cid:2) It was a well-writtenreport.
However, a modifying phrase is not hyphenated when it follows the
noun it modifies.
(cid:2) The report was well written.
If each of the words can modify the noun without the aid of the other
modifying word or words, do not use a hyphen (a new laserprinter). If
the first word is an adverb ending in -ly, do not use a hyphen (a pri-
vately held company). A hyphen is always used as part of a letter or
number modifier (A-frame house, 17-inch screen).
In a series of unit modifiers that all have the same term following
the hyphen, the term following the hyphen need not be repeated
throughout the series; for greater smoothness and brevity, use the term
only at the end of the series.
(cid:2) The third-, fourth-, and fifth-floor laboratories were inspected.

=== Page 279 ===
6860ch0H.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:51 AM Page 246
246 hyphens
Hyphens with Prefixes and Suffixes
A hyphen is used with a prefix when the root word is a proper noun
(pre-Columbian, anti-American, post-Newtonian). A hyphen may be
used when the prefix ends and the root word begins with the same vowel
(re-enter, anti-inflammatory). A hyphen is used when ex- means “for-
mer” (ex-president, ex-spouse). A hyphen may be used to emphasize a
prefix. (“He is anti-change.”) The suffix-electis hyphenated (president-
elect).
Hyphens and Clarity
The presence or absence of a hyphen can alter the meaning of a sen-
H tence.
AMBIGUOUS We need a biological waste management system.
That sentence could mean one of two things: (1) We need a system to
manage “biological waste,” or (2) We need a “biological” system to
manage waste.
CLEAR We need a biological-wastemanagement system. [1]
CLEAR We need a biological waste-managementsystem. [2]
To avoid confusion, some words and modifiers should always be hyphen-
ated. Re-coverdoes not mean the same thing as recover, for example; the
same is true of re-signand resignand un-ionizedand unionized.
Other Uses of the Hyphen
Hyphens are used between letters showing how a word is spelled.
(cid:2) In his e-mail, he misspelled believedas b-e-l-e-i-v-e-d.
A hyphen can stand for to or through between letters and numbers
(pages 44-46, the Detroit-Toledo Expressway, A-L and M-Z).
Hyphens are commonly used in telephone numbers (800-555-
1212), Web addresses (computer-parts.com), file names (report-09.doc),
and similar number/symbol combinations. See also dates.
WRITER’S CHECKLIST Using Hyphens to Divide Words
(cid:4)
Do notdivide one-syllable words.
(cid:4)
Divide words atsyllable breaks,which you can determine with a dic-
tionary.
(cid:4)
Do notdivide a word if only one letter would remain atthe end of a
line or if fewer than three letters would starta new line.

=== Page 280 ===
6860ch0H.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:51 AM Page 247
hyphens 247
Writer’s Checklist:Using Hyphens to Divide Words (continued)
(cid:4)
Do notdivide a word atthe end of a page;carry itover to the next
page.
(cid:4)
If a word already has a hyphen in its spelling,divide the word atthe
existing hyphen.
(cid:4)
Do notuse a hyphen to break a URL or an e-mail address atthe end of
a line because itmay confuse readers who could assume thatthe hy-
phen is partof the address.
H

=== Page 281 ===
6860ch0I.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:51 AM Page 248
I
idioms
An idiom is a group of words that has a special meaning apart from its
literal meaning. Someone who “runs for office” in the United States, for
example, need not be an athlete. The same candidate would “stand for
office” in the United Kingdom. Because such expressions are specific to
a culture, nonnative speakers must memorize them.
I Idioms are often constructed with prepositions that follow adjec-
tives (similar to), nouns (need for), and verbs (approve of). Some id-
ioms can change meaning slightly with the preposition used, as in agree
to (“consent”) and agree with (“in accord”). The following are typical
idioms that give nonnative speakers trouble.
call off [cancel] hand in [submit]
call on [visita client] hand out[distribute]
cross out[draw a line through] keep on [continue]
do over [repeata task] leave out[omit]
drop in on [visitunexpectedly] look up [research a subject]
figure out[solve a problem] putoff [postpone]
find out[discover information] run into [meetby chance]
getthrough with [finish] run outof [deplete supply]
give up [quit] watch outfor [be careful]
Idioms often provide helpful shortcuts. In fact, they can make writing
more natural and vigorous. Avoid them, however, if your writing is to
be translated into another language or read in other English-speaking
countries. Because no language system can fully explain such usages, a
reader must check dictionariesor usage guides to interpret the meaning
of idioms. See also English as a second languageand international corre-
spondence.
WEB LINK Prepositional Idioms
For links to helpful lists of common pairings of prepositions with nouns,
verbs,and adjectives,see bedfordstmartins.com/alredtechand select
Links for Handbook Entries.
248

=== Page 282 ===
6860ch0I.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:51 AM Page 249
in order to 249
illegal / illicit
If something is illegal, it is prohibited by law. If something is illicit, it is
prohibited by either law or custom. Illicit behavior may or may not be
illegal, but it does violate social convention or moral codes and there-
fore usually has a clandestine or immoral connotation. (“The employee’s
illicit sexual behavior caused a scandal, but the company’s attorney
concluded that no illegalacts were committed.”)
illustrations (see visuals)
imply / infer
I
If you imply something, you hint at or suggest it. (“Her e-mail implied
that the project would be delayed.”) If you infersomething, you reach a
conclusion based on evidence or interpretation. (“The manager inferred
from the e-mail that the project would be delayed.”)
in / into
Inmeans “inside of”; intoimplies movement from the outside to the in-
side. (“The equipment was in the test chamber, so she reached into the
chamber to adjust it.”)
in order to
Most often, in order to is a meaningless filler phrase that is dropped
into a sentence without thought. See also conciseness.
To
(cid:2) In order tostart the engine, open the choke and throttle and then
^
press the starter.
However, the phrase in order to is sometimes essential to the meaning
of a sentence.
(cid:2) If the vertical scale of a graph line would not normally show the
zero point, use a horizontal break in the graph in order toinclude
the zero point.

=== Page 283 ===
6860ch0I.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:51 AM Page 250
250 in terms of
In order toalso helps control the paceof a sentence, even when it is not
essential to the meaning of the sentence.
(cid:2) The committee must know the estimated costs in order toevaluate
the feasibility of the project.
in terms of
When used to indicate a shift from one kind of language or terminology
to another, the phrase in terms ofcan be useful.
(cid:2) In terms ofgross sales, the year has been relatively successful; how-
ever, in terms ofnet income, it has been discouraging.
I When simply dropped into a sentence because it easily comes to mind,
in terms ofis meaningless affectation. See also conciseness.
(cid:2) She was thinking in termsof subcontracting much of the work.
indexing
An index is an alphabetical list of all the major topics and sometimes
subtopics in a written work. It cites the pages where each topic can be
found and allows readers to find information on particular topics
quickly and easily, as shown in Figure I–1. The index always comes at
the very end of the work. Many Web sites also provide linked subject
indexes to the content of the sites.
The key to compiling a useful index is selectivity. Instead of listing
every possible reference to a topic, select references to passages where
the topic is discussed fully or where a significant point is made about it.
For index entries like those in Figure I–1, choose key terms that best
monitoring programs, 27–44 Main entry
aquatic, 42
ecological, 40 Subentries
meteorological, 37
operational, 39
Sub-subentries
preoperational, 37
radiological, 30
terrestrial, 41, 43–44 Subentries
thermal, 27
FIGUREI–1. Index Entry (with Main Entry,Subentries,and Sub-subentries)

=== Page 284 ===
6860ch0I.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:51 AM Page 251
indexing 251
represent a topic. Key terms are those words or phrases that a reader
would most likely look for in an index. For example, the key terms in a
reference to the development of legislation about environmental impact
statements would probably be legislation and environmental impact
statement, not development. In selecting terms for index entries, use
chapter or section titles only if they include such key terms. For index
entries on tables and visuals, use the words from their titles that will
function as key terms a reader might seek. Create alphabetical Web-site
indexes from links to topics in subsites throughout the larger site.
Compiling an Index
Do not attempt to compile an index until the final manuscript is com-
pleted because terminology and page numbers will not be accurate be-
fore then. The best way to manually compile a list of topics is to read
I
through your written work from the beginning; each time a key term
appears in a significant context, note the term and its page number. An
index entry can consist solely of a main entry and its page number.
(cid:2) aquatic monitoring programs, 42
An index entry can also include a main entry, subentries, and even sub-
subentries, as shown in Figure I–1. A subentry indicates the pages
where a specific subcategory or subdivision of the main topic can be
found. When you have compiled a list of key terms for the entire work,
sort the main entries alphabetically, then sort all subentries and sub-
subentries alphabetically beneath their main entries. To help indexers
with this process, the American Society of Indexers lists software avail-
able for indexing at their Web site, www.asindexing.org.
Wording Index Entries
The first word of an index entry should be the principal word because
the reader will look for topics alphabetically by their main words. Select-
ing the right word to list first is easier for some topics than for others.
For instance, tips on repairing electrical wire would not be a suitable
index entry because a reader looking for information on electrical wire
would not look under the word tips. Ordinarily, an entry with two key-
words, such as electrical wire, should be indexed under each word (elec-
trical wireand wire, electrical). A main index entry should be written as
a nounor a noun phraserather than as an adjectivealone or a verb.
(cid:2) electrical wire, 20–22
grounding, 21
insulation, 20
repairing, 22
size, 21

=== Page 285 ===
6860ch0I.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:51 AM Page 252
252 indexing
DIGITAL TIP
Creating an Index
Word-processing software can provide a quick and an efficientway to
create an alphabetical subject index of your document.First,review
the documentto identify entries:the words,phrases,figure captions,
or symbols thatyou wish to index.Then,following your software’s in-
structions, highlight and code these entries so that they can be
arranged in the index.Your draftindex will still need careful review,
butusing the software to create the firstdraftcan save time.For fur-
ther instructions,see bedfordstmartins.com/alredtechand selectDigi-
tal Tips,“Creating an Index.”
I
Cross-Referencing
Cross-references in an index help readers find other related topics in the
text. A reader looking up technical writing, for example, might find
cross-references to report or manual. Cross-references do not include
page numbers; they merely direct readers to another main index entry
where they can find page numbers. The two kinds of cross-references
are seereferences and see alsoreferences.
See references are most commonly used with topics that can be
identified by several different terms. Listing the topic page numbers by
only one of the terms, the indexer then lists the other terms throughout
the index as seereferences.
(cid:2) economic costs. Seebenefit-cost analyses
Seereferences also direct readers to index entries where a topic is listed
as a subentry.
(cid:2) L-shaped fittings. Seeelbows, L-shaped fittings
See also references indicate other entries that include additional infor-
mation on a topic.
(cid:2) ecological programs, 40–49. See alsomonitoring programs
WRITER’S CHECKLIST Indexing
(cid:3)
Use lowercase for the firstwords and all subsequentwords of main
entries,subentries,and sub-subentries unless they are proper nouns
or would otherwise be capitalized.See capitalization.
(cid:3)
Use italics for the cross-reference terms seeand see also.

=== Page 286 ===
6860ch0I.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:51 AM Page 253
inquiries and responses 253
Writer’s Checklist:Indexing (continued)
(cid:3)
Place each subentry in the index on a separate line,indented from its
main entry.Indentsub-subentries from the preceding subentry.In-
dentations allow readers to scan a column quickly for pertinent
subentries or sub-subentries.
(cid:3)
Separate entries from page numbers with commas.
(cid:3)
Formatthe index economically with double columns,as is done in the
index to this book.
indiscreet / indiscrete
I
Indiscreetmeans “lacking in prudence or sound judgment.” (“His pub-
lic discussion of the proposed merger was indiscreet.”) Indiscretemeans
“not divided or divisible into parts.” (“The separate departments, once
combined, become indiscrete.”) See also discreet/ discrete.
individual
Individualis most appropriate when used as an adjectiveto distinguish
a single person from a group. (“The individual employee’s obligations
are detailed in the policy manual.”) Using individualas a nounis an af-
fectation. Use peopleor another appropriate term.
members of
(cid:2) Several individuals onthe committee did not vote.
^
inquiries and responses
The purpose of writing inquiry letters or e-mail messages is to obtain
responses to requests or specific questions, as in Figure I–2, which
shows a college student who is requesting information from an official
at a power company. Inquiries may either benefit the reader (as in re-
quests for information about a product that a company has advertised)
or benefit the writer (as in the student’s inquiry in Figure I–2). Inquiries
that primarily benefit the writer require the use of persuasion and spe-
cial consideration of the needs of your audience. See also correspon-
dence.

=== Page 287 ===
6860ch0I.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:51 AM Page 254
254 inquiries and responses
Dear Ms. Metcalf:
I am an architecture student at the University of Dayton, and I am
working with a team of students to design an energy-efficient house
for a class project. I am writing to request information on heating
systems based on the specifications of our design. We would appre-
ciate any information you could provide.
The house we are designing contains 2,000 square feet of living
space (17,600 cubic feet) and meets all the requirements in your
brochure “Insulating for Efficiency.” We need the following infor-
mation, based on the southern Ohio climate:
• The proper-size heat pump for such a home.
• The wattage of the supplemental electrical heating units required.
I
• The estimated power consumption and rates for those units for
one year.
We will be happy to send you our preliminary design report. If you
have questions or suggestions, contact me at kparsons@fly.ud.edu
or call 513-229-4598.
Thank you for your help.
FIGURE I–2. Inquiry
Writing Inquiries
Inquiries need to be specific, clear, and concise in order to receive a
prompt, helpful reply.
• Phrase your request so that the reader will immediately know the
type of information you are seeking, why you need it, and how
you will use it.
• If possible, present questions in a numbered or bulleted listto
make it easy for your reader to respond to them.
• Keep the number of questions to a minimum to improve your
chances of receiving a prompt response.
• Offer some inducement for the reader to respond, such as promis-
ing to share the results of what you are doing. See also “you”
viewpoint.
• Promise to keep responses confidential, when appropriate.

=== Page 288 ===
6860ch0I.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:51 AM Page 255
inquiries and responses 255
In the closing, thank the reader for taking the time to respond. In addi-
tion, make it convenient for the recipient to respond by providing your
contact information, such as a phone number or an e-mail address, as
shown in Figure I–2.
Responding to Inquiries
When you receive an inquiry, determine whether you have both the in-
formation and the authority to respond. If you are the right person in
your organization to respond, answer as promptly as you can, and be
sure to answer every inquiry or question asked, as shown in Figure I–3.
How long and how detailed your response should be depends on the
nature of the question and the information the writer provides.
If you have received an inquiry that you feel you cannot answer,
find out who can and forward the inquiry to that person. Notify the I
writer that you have forwarded the inquiry. The person who replies to a
forwarded inquiry should state in the first paragraph of the response
who has forwarded the original inquiry, as shown in Figure I–3.
Dear Ms. Parsons:
Jane Metcalf forwarded to me your inquiry of March 11 about the house
that your architecture team is designing. I can estimate the heating require-
ments of a typical home of 17,600 cubic feet as follows:
• For such a home, we would generally recommend a heat pump capable
of delivering 40,000 BTUs, such as our model AL-42 (17 kilowatts).
• With the AL-42’s efficiency, you don’t need supplemental heating units.
• Depending on usage, the AL-42 unit averages between 1,000 and 1,500
kilowatt-hours from December through March. To determine the current
rate for such usage, check with Dayton Power and Light Company.
I can give you an answer that would apply specifically to your house based
on its particular design (such as number of stories, windows, and entrances).
If you send me more details, I will be happy to provide more precise fig-
ures for your interesting project.
Sincerely,
FIGURE I–3. Response to an Inquiry

=== Page 289 ===
6860ch0I.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:51 AM Page 256
256 inside / inside of
inside / inside of
In the phrase inside of, the word ofis redundant and should be omitted.
(cid:2) The switch is just inside ofthe door.
Using inside of to mean “in less time than” is colloquial and should be
avoided in writing.
in less than
(cid:2) They were finished inside ofan hour.
^
insoluble / insolvable
I
The words insolubleand insolvableare sometimes used interchangeably
to mean “incapable of being solved.” Insoluble also means “incapable
of being dissolved.”
(cid:2) Until yesterday, the production problem seemed insolvable.
(cid:2) Insolublefiber passes through the intestines largely intact.
instant messaging
Instant messaging (IM) is a text-based communications medium that
fills a niche between telephone calls and e-mailmessages. It allows both
real-time communications, like a phone call, and the transfer of text or
other files, like an e-mail message. It is especially useful to cell-phone
users who are working at sites without access to e-mail. See also select-
ingthe medium.
To set up routine IM exchanges, add the user names of the people
you exchange messages with to your list of contacts (or buddy list).
Choose a screen name that your colleagues will recognize. If you use IM
routinely as part of your job, create an “away” message that signals
when you are not available for IM interactions.
When writing instant messages, keep your messages simple and to
the point, covering only one subject in each message to prevent confu-
sion and inappropriate responses. Because screen space is often limited
and speed is essential, many who send instant messages use abbrevia-
tions and shortened spellings (“u” for “you” and “L8R” for “later”).
Be sure that your reader will understand such abbreviations; when in
doubt, avoid them.*
*Many online sites, such as www.netlingo.com, define IM and other such abbre-
viations.

=== Page 290 ===
6860ch0I.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:51 AM Page 257
instantmessaging 257
In Figure I–4, the manager of a software development company in
Maine (“Diane”) is exchanging instant messages with a business part-
ner in the Netherlands (“Andre”). Notice that the correspondents use
an informal style that includes personal and professional abbreviations
with which both are familiar (“NP” for “no problem”; and “QSG” for
Quick Start Guide). These messages demonstrate how IM can not only
Instant Message with "Andre"
Andre
Last message received at: 09:04:09 AM
Andre (08:58:06 AM): Hi Diane! I
Diane (08:58:36 AM): good morning
Andre (09:00:04 AM): Time for a quick question?
Diane (09:00:37 AM): NP!
Andre (09:00:58 AM): How is it going with the QSG?
Andre (09:01:02 AM): Will you be finished soon?
Diane (09:01:49 AM): I am working on it.
Diane (09:01:59 AM): I am targeting Friday
Andre (09:02:16 AM): If you are not quite finished, send me
what you have.
Diane (09:02:58 AM): I would recommend finishing the QSG
before we focus on user guide.
Andre (09:03:09 AM): good idea
Andre (09:03:47 AM): ok, I won't keep you any longer
Andre (09:03:57 AM): bye
Diane (09:04:09 AM): Talk to you later.
FIGUREI–4. Instant-Message Exchange

=== Page 291 ===
6860ch0I.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:51 AM Page 258
258 instructions
help exchange information quickly but also build rapport among dis-
tant colleagues and team members. The exchange also demonstrates
why IM is not generally appropriate for many complex messages or for
more formal circumstances, such as when establishing new professional
relationships.
ETHICS NOTE Be sure to follow your employer’s IM policies, such as
any limitations on sending personal messages during work hours or re-
quirements concerning confidentiality. If no specific policy exists, as-
sume that personal use of IM is not appropriate in your workplace. ✦
WRITER’S CHECKLIST InstantMessaging Privacy and Security
(cid:3)
Organize your contact,or buddy,lists to separate workplace contacts
I from family and friends so thatyou do notinadvertently send per-
sonal messages to professional associates and vice versa.Consider
restricting buddy lists on professional IM accounts to business
associates.
(cid:3)
Learn the options,capabilities,and security limitations of your IM sys-
tem and setthe preferences thatbestsuityour use of the system.
(cid:3)
Be especially alertto the possibilities of virus infections and security
risks with messages,attachments,access to buddy lists,and other
privacy issues.
(cid:3)
Save significantIM exchanges (or logs) for your future reference.
(cid:3)
Be aware thatinstantmessages can be saved by your recipients
and may be archived by your employer.(See the Ethics Note on
page 162.)
(cid:3)
Do notuse professional IM for gossip or inappropriate exchanges.
instructions
Instructions that are clear and easy to follow prevent miscommunica-
tion and help readers complete tasks effectively and safely. To write ef-
fective instructions, you must thoroughly understand the process,
system, or device you are describing. Often, you must observe someone
as he or she completes a task and perform the steps yourself before you
begin to write. Finally, keep in mind that the most effective instructions
often combine written elements and visuals that reinforce each other.
See also manuals.

=== Page 292 ===
6860ch0I.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:51 AM Page 259
instructions 259
Writing Instructions
Consider your audience’s level of knowledge. If all your readers have
good backgrounds in the topic, you can use fairly specialized terms. If
that is not the case, use plain language or include a glossaryfor special-
ized terms that you cannot avoid. See also audience.
Clear and easy-to-follow instructions are written as commands in the
imperative mood, active voice, and (whenever possible) present tense.
.
Raise the
(cid:2) Theaccess lidwill be raised by the operator.
^ ^
Although conciseness is important in instructions, clarity is essential.
You can make sentences shorter by leaving out some articles (a, an,
the), some pronouns (you, this, these), and some verbs, but such sen-
tences may result in telegraphic style and be harder to understand. For
I
example, the first version of the following instruction for placing a doc-
ument in a scanner tray is confusing.
CONFUSING Place document in tray with printed side facing
opposite.
CLEAR Place the document in the document tray with the
printed side facing away from you.
One good way to make instructions easy to follow is to divide them
into short, simple steps in their proper sequence. Steps can be organized
with words (first, next, finally) that indicate time or sequence.
(cid:2) First, determine the problem the customer is having with the com-
puter. Next, observe the system in operation. At that time, question
the operator until you are sure that the problem has been explained
completely. Thenanalyze the problem and make any necessary
adjustments.
You can also use numbers, as in the following:
(cid:2) 1. Connect each black cable wire to a brass terminal.
2. Attach one 4-inch green jumper wire to the back.
3. Connect the jumper wire to the bare cable wire.
Consider using the numbered- or bulleted-list feature of your word-
processing software to create sequenced steps. See lists.
Plan ahead for your reader. If the instructions in step 2 will affect a
process in step 9, say so in step 2. Sometimes your instructions have to
make clear that two operations must be performed simultaneously. Ei-
ther state that fact in an introduction to the specific instructions or in-
clude both operations in one step.

=== Page 293 ===
6860ch0I.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:51 AM Page 260
260 instructions
CONFUSING 1. Hold down the CONTROL key.
2. Press the RETURN key before releasing the
CONTROL key.
CLEAR 1.While holding down the CONTROL key, press the
RETURN key.
If your instructions involve many steps, break them into stages, each
with a separate heading so that each stage begins again with step 1.
Using headingsas dividers is especially important if your reader is likely
to be performing the operation as he or she reads the instructions.
Illustrating Instructions
Illustrations should be developed together with the text, especially for
complex instructions that benefit from visuals that foster clarity and
I
conciseness. Such visuals as drawings, flowcharts, maps, and photo-
graphs enable your reader to identify relationships more easily than
long explanations. Some instructions, such as those for products sold
internationally, use only visuals. The entry global graphics describes vi-
suals that avoid culture-specific connotations and are often used in such
instructions.
Consider the layoutand design of your instructions to most effec-
tively integrate visuals. Highlight important visuals as well as text by
making them stand out from the surrounding text. Consider using
boxes and boldface or distinctive headings. Experiment with font style,
size, and color to determine which devices are most effective.
The instructions in Figure I–5 guide the reader through the steps of
streaking a saucer-sized disk of material (called agar) used to grow bac-
teria colonies. The purpose is to thin out the original specimen (the in-
oculum) so that the bacteria will grow in small, isolated colonies. This
section could be part of other larger instructional documents for which
streaking is only one step among others.
WEB LINK Writing Instructions
For links to additional advice on writing instructions and models,see
bedfordstmartins.com/alredtechand selectLinks for Handbook Entries.
Warning Readers
Alert your readers to any potentially hazardous materials (or actions)
before they reach the step for which the material is needed. Caution
readers handling hazardous materials about any requirements for spe-
cial clothing, tools, equipment, and other safety measures. Highlight
warnings, cautions, and precautions to make them stand out visually

=== Page 294 ===
6860ch0I.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:51 AM Page 261
instructions 261
STREAKING AN AGAR PLATE
Distribute the inoculum over the surface of the agar in the
following manner:
1. Beginning at one edge of the saucer, thin the inoculum by
streaking back and forth over the same area several
times, sweeping across the agar surface until approxi-
mately one-quarter of the surface has been covered.
Sterilize the loop in an open flame.
2. Streak at right angles to the originally inoculated area, car-
rying the inoculum out from the streaked areas onto
the sterile surface with only the first stroke of the wire.
Cover half of the remaining sterile agar surface. Steril-
ize the loop.
I
3. Repeat as described in Step 2, covering the remaining
sterile agar surface.
FIGURE I–5. Illustrated Instructions
from the surrounding text. Present warning notices in a box, in all up-
percase letters, in large and distinctive fonts, or in color. Experiment
with font style, size, and color to determine which devices are most ef-
fective.
Figure I–6 shows a warning from an instruction manual for the use
of a gas grill. Notice that a drawing supports the text of the warning.

=== Page 295 ===
6860ch0I.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:51 AM Page 262
262 instructions
WARNING
• The assembler/owner is responsible for the assembly,
installation, and maintenance of the grill.
• Use the grill outdoors only.
• Do not let children operate or play near your grill.
• Keep the grill area clear and free from materials that burn,
gasoline, bottled gas in any form, and other flammable
vapors and liquids.
• Do not block holes in bottom and back of grill.
• Visually check burner flames on a regular basis.
I
• Use the grill in a well-ventilated space. Never use in an
enclosed space, carport, garage, porch, patio, or building
made of combustible construction, or under overhead
construction.
• Do not install your grill in or on recreational vehicles and/or
boats.
• Keep grills a distance of 36″, or 3 ft. (approximately 1 m),
from buildings to reduce the possibility of fire or heat
damage to materials.
36”,
OR
3ft
(1m)
36”,
OR
3ft
(1m)
FIGURE I–6. Warning in a Setof Instructions

=== Page 296 ===
6860ch0I.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:51 AM Page 263
insure / ensure / assure 263
Various standards organizations and agencies publish guidelines on
the use of terminology, colors, and symbols in instructions and labeling.
Two widely influential organizations that publish such guidelines are
the American National Standards Institute (www.ansi.org) and the In-
ternational Organization for Standardization (www.iso.org).
Testing Instructions
To test the accuracy and clarity of your instructions, ask someone who
is not familiar with the task to follow your directions. A first-time user
can spot missing steps or point out passages that should be worded
more clearly. As you observe your tester, note any steps that seem espe-
cially confusing and revise accordingly. See usability testing.
WRITER’S CHECKLIST Writing Instructions I
(cid:3)
Use the imperative mood and the active voice.
(cid:3)
Use shortsentences and simple presenttense as much as possible.
(cid:3)
Avoid technical terminology and jargonthatyour readers mightnot
know,including undefined abbreviations.
(cid:3)
Do notuse elegantvariation (two differentwords for the same thing).
See also affectation.
(cid:3)
Eliminate any ambiguity.
(cid:3)
Use effective visuals and highlighting devices.
(cid:3)
Include appropriate warnings and cautions.
(cid:3)
Verify thatmeasurements,distances,times,and relationships are pre-
cise and accurate.
(cid:3)
Testyour instructions by having someone else follow them while you
observe.
insure / ensure / assure
Insure, ensure, and assure all mean “make secure or certain.” Assure
refers to people, and it alone has the connotation of setting a person’s
mind at rest. (“I assureyou that the equipment will be available.”) En-
sure and insure mean “make secure from harm.” Only insure is widely
used in the sense of guaranteeing the value of life or property.
(cid:2) We need all the data to ensurethe success of the project.
(cid:2) We should insurethe contents of the warehouse.

=== Page 297 ===
6860ch0I.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:51 AM Page 264
264 intensifiers
intensifiers
Intensifiers are adverbs that emphasize degree, such as very, quite,
rather, such, and too. Although intensifiers serve a legitimate and neces-
sary function, unnecessary intensifiers can weaken your writing. Elimi-
nate those that do not make an obvious contribution or replace them
with specific details.
(cid:2) The team learned the verygood news that it had been awarded
$10,000
a rather substantial monetaryprize for its design.
^
Some words (such as perfect, impossible, and final) do not logically
permit intensification because, by definition, they do not allow degrees
of comparison. Although usageoften ignores that logical restriction, to
I
ignore it is to defy the basic meanings of such words. See also adjec-
tives, conciseness, and equal / unique / perfect.
interface
An interface is a surface that provides a common boundary between
two bodies or areas. The bodies or areas may be physical (“the interface
of a piston and a cylinder”) or conceptual (“the interfaceof mathemat-
ics and economics”). Do not use interface as a substitute for the verb
cooperate, interact, or even work. See affectationand buzzwords.
interjections
An interjection is a word or phrase standing alone or inserted into a
sentence to exclaim or to command attention. Grammatically, it has no
connection to the sentence. An interjection can be strong (Hey! Ouch!
Wow!) or mild (oh, well, indeed). A strong interjection is followed by
an exclamation mark.
(cid:2) Wow! Profits more than doubled last quarter.
A weak interjection is followed by a comma.
(cid:2) Well, we need to rethink the proposal.
An interjection inserted into a sentence usually requires a comma before
it and after it.

=== Page 298 ===
6860ch0I.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:51 AM Page 265
international correspondence 265
(cid:2) We must, indeed, rethink the proposal.
Because they get their main expressive force from sound, interjections
are more common in speech than in writing. Use them sparingly.
international correspondence
Business correspondence varies among national cultures. Organiza-
tional patterns, persuasive strategies, forms of courtesy, formality, and
ideas about efficiency differ from country to country. For example, in
the United States, direct, concise correspondence may demonstrate
courtesy by not wasting another person’s time. In many other countries,
such directness and brevity may seem rude to readers, suggesting that
I
the writer wishes to spend as little time as possible corresponding with
the reader. (See audienceand tone.) Likewise, where a U.S. writer might
consider one brief letter or e-mail sufficient to communicate a request,
a writer in another country may expect an exchange of three or four
longer letters to pave the way for action.
Cultural Differences in Correspondence
When you read correspondence from businesspeople in other cultures
or countries, be alert to differences in such features as customary ex-
pressions, openings, and closings. Japanese business writers, for ex-
ample, traditionally use indirect openings that reflect on the season,
compliment the reader’s success, and offer hopes for the reader’s contin-
ued prosperity. Consider deeper issues as well, such as how writers
from other cultures express bad news. Japanese writers traditionally ex-
press negative messages, such as refusal letters, indirectly to avoid em-
barrassing the recipient. Such cultural differences are often based on
perceptions of time, face-saving, and traditions. The features and com-
munication styles of specific national cultures are complex; the entry
global communication provides information and resources for cross-
cultural study. See also global graphics.
Cross-Cultural Examples
Figures I–7 and I–8 on pages 266 and 267 are a draft and a final version
of a letter written by an American businessman to a Japanese business-
man. The opening and closing of the draft in Figure I–7 do not include
enough of the politeness strategies that are important in Japanese cul-
ture, and the informal salutation inappropriately uses the recipient’s first
name (Dear Ichiro:). This draft also contains idioms (looking forward,
company family), jargon (transport will be holding...), contractions

=== Page 299 ===
6860ch0I.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:51 AM Page 266
266 international correspondence
U.S.writer “Looking
moves too forward”is
quickly to use anidiom that
of firstname. may notbe
DRAFTFORREVIEW
clear.
Contrac- Dear Ichiro: Firstpara-
tion (I’m) graph gets
is too infor- to business
mal and I’m writing to confirm travel arrangements for your visit to Tucson abruptly:
may not add more
appear in next month. We at Sun West are looking forward to meeting you personal
an English and cultivating a successful business relationship between our two greeting.
dictionary.
companies.
I understand that you will arrive on 3/23/09 on Delta, flight #186 at
Jargon
1:30 p.m. (itinerary enclosed). When you pick up your baggage at
I (“transport”)
Tucson, go directly toward the “taxi-limo” area where our transport is inappro-
priate.
will be holding a card with your name and can take you directly to
Loewes Ventana Canyon Resort. The resort has an excellent restau-
Abbrevi- Inappropri-
ated with rant—we promise not to take you to the “ptomaine palace” across ate humor
U.S.date from our main offices! and
format:use allusion.
March 23,
2009. We are excited to meet you. We want you to meet our company
family. After you meet everyone, you will enjoy a catered breakfast
in our conference room. Events include presentations from the Firstthree
The use of sentences
“family”is a president of the company and from departmental directors on use overly
figure of several topics. simplified
speech that style.
could be
confusing. I have enclosed a guidebook and map of Tucson and material on
our company. If you see anything that interests you, let me know,
and we will be happy to show you our city and all it has to offer.
And if you have any questions about the company before we see
you, just e-mail or fax (I don’t think regular mail will get to us in
time).
Abruptand
informal:
Cheers,
add more
goodwill
to closing.
Ty Smith
Vice President
FIGUREI–7. Inappropriate International Correspondence (DraftMarked for
Revision)

=== Page 300 ===
6860ch0I.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:51 AM Page 267
international correspondence 267
Sun West Corporation,Inc.
2565 North Armadillo
Tucson,AZ 85719 Sun West
Corporation, Inc.
Phone:(602) 555-6677
Fax:(602) 555-6678 sunwest.com
March 4, 2009
Ichiro Katsumi
Investment Director
Toshiba Investment Company
1-29-10 Ichiban-cho
I
Tokyo 105, Japan
Dear Mr. Katsumi:
I hope that you and your family are well and prospering in the new
year. We at Sun West Corporation are very pleased that you will be
coming to visit us in Tucson this month. It will be a pleasure to meet
you, and we are very gratified and honored that you are interested in
investing in our company.
So that we can ensure that your stay will be pleasurable, we have taken
care of all of your travel arrangements. You will
• Depart Narita–New Tokyo International Airport on Delta Airlines
flight #75 at 1700 on March 23, 2009.
• Arrive at Los Angeles International Airport at 1050 local time and
depart for Tucson on Delta flight #186 at 1205.
• Arrive at Tucson International Airport at 1330 local time on March 23.
• Depart Tucson International Airport on Delta flight #123 at 1845 on
March 30.
• Arrive in Salt Lake City, Utah, at 1040 and depart on Delta flight #34
at 1115.
• Arrive in Portland, Oregon, at 1210 local time and depart on Delta
flight #254 at 1305.
• Arrive in Tokyo at 1505 local time on March 31.
If you need additional information about your travel plans or informa-
tion on Sun West Corporation, please call, fax, or e-mail me directly at
tsmith@sunwest.com. That way, we will receive your message in time
to make the appropriate changes or additions.
FIGURE I–8. Appropriate International Correspondence

=== Page 301 ===
6860ch0I.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:51 AM Page 268
268 international correspondence
Mr. Ichiro Katsumi 2 March 4, 2009
After you arrive in Tucson, a chauffeur from Skyline Limousines
will be waiting for you at Gate 12. He or she will be carrying a card
with your name, will help you collect your luggage from the bag-
gage claim area, and will then drive you to the Loewes Ventana
Canyon Resort. This resort is one of the most prestigious in Tucson,
with spectacular desert views, high-quality amenities, and one of
the best golf courses in the city. The next day, the chauffeur will be
back at the Ventana at 0900 to drive you to Sun West Corporation.
We at Sun West Corporation are very excited to meet you and intro-
duce you to all the staff members of our hardworking and growing
I company. After you meet everyone, you will enjoy a catered break-
fast in our conference room. At that time, you will receive a
schedule of events planned for the remainder of your trip. Events
include presentations from the president of the company and from
departmental directors on
• The history of Sun West Corporation
• The uniqueness of our products and current success in the
marketplace
• Demographic information and the benefits of being located in
Tucson
• The potential for considerable profits for both our companies
with your company’s investment
We encourage you to read through the enclosed guidebook and map
of Tucson. In addition to events planned at Sun West Corporation,
you will find many natural wonders and historical sites to see in
Tucson and in Arizona in general. If you see any particular event or
place that you would like to visit, please let us know. We will be
happy to show you our city and all it has to offer.
Again, we are very honored that you will be visiting us, and we
look forward to a successful business relationship between our two
companies.
Sincerely,
Ty Smith
Ty Smith
Vice President
Enclosures (2)
FIGURE I–8. Appropriate International Correspondence (continued)

=== Page 302 ===
6860ch0I.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:51 AM Page 269
international correspondence 269
(I’m, don’t), informal language (just e-mail or fax, Cheers), and humor
and allusion (“ptomaine palace” across from our main offices).
Compare that letter to the one in Figure I–8, which is written in
language that is courteous, literal, and specific. This revised letter be-
gins with concern about the recipient’s family and prosperity because
that opening honors traditional Japanese patterns in business corre-
spondence. The letter is free of slang, idioms, and jargon. The sentences
are shorter than in the draft, bulleted lists break up the paragraphs,
contractions are avoided, months are spelled out, and 24-hour clock
time is used.
When writing for international readers, rethink the ingrained
habits that define how you express yourself, learn as much as you can
about the cultural expectations of others, and focus on politeness strate-
gies that demonstrate your respect for readers. Doing so will help you
achieve clarityand mutual understanding with international readers. I
WEB LINK Google’s International Directory
Google’s International Business and Trade Directory provides an excel-
lentstarting pointfor searching the Web for information related
to customs,communication,and international standards.See
bedfordstmartins.com/alredtechand selectLinks for Handbook Entries.
WRITER’S CHECKLIST Writing International Correspondence
(cid:3)
Observe the guidelines for courtesy,such as those in the Writer’s
Checklist:Using Tone to Build Goodwillin correspondenceon page
105.
(cid:3)
Write clear and complete sentences:Unusual word order or rambling
sentences will frustrate and confuse readers.See garbled sentences.
(cid:3)
Avoid an overly simplified style thatmay offend or any affectation
thatmay confuse the reader.See also English as a second language.
(cid:3)
Avoid humor,irony,and sarcasm;they are easily misunderstood out-
side their cultural context.
(cid:3)
Do notuse idioms,jargon,slang expressions,unusual figures of
speech,or allusionsto events or attitudes particular to American life.
(cid:3)
Consider whether necessary technical terminology can be found in
abbreviated English-language dictionaries;if itcannot,carefully de-
fine such terminology.
(cid:3)
Do notuse contractions or abbreviationsthatmay notbe clear to in-
ternational readers.

=== Page 303 ===
6860ch0I.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:51 AM Page 270
270 interviewing for information
Writer’s Checklist:Writing International Correspondence (continued)
(cid:3)
Avoid inappropriate informality,such as using firstnames too quickly.
(cid:3)
Write outdates,whether in the month-day-year style (June 11,2006,
not6/11/06) used in the United States or the day-month-year style
(11 June 2006,not11/6/06) used in many other parts of the world.
(cid:3)
Specify time zones or refer to international standards,such as Green-
wich Mean Time (GMT) or Coordinated Universal Time (UTC).
(cid:3)
Use international measurementstandards,such as the metric system
(18°C,14 cm,45 kg,and so on) where possible.
(cid:3)
Ask someone from your intended audience’s culture or with appropri-
ate expertise to review your draftbefore you complete your final
proofreading.
I
interviewing for information
Interviewing others who have knowledge of your subject is often an es-
sential method of research in technical writing. The process of inter-
viewing for information includes determining the proper person to
interview, preparing for the interview, conducting the interview, and ex-
panding your notes soon after the interview.
Determining the Proper Person to Interview
Many times, your subject or purposelogically points to the proper per-
son to interview for information. For example, if you were writing
about using the Web to market a software-development business, you
would want to interview someone with extensive experience in Web
marketing as well as someone who has built a successful business devel-
oping software. The following sources can help you determine the ap-
propriate person to interview: (1) workplace colleagues or faculty in
appropriate academic departments, (2) local chapters of professional
societies, (3) information from “contact” or “about” links at company
or organization Web sites, and (4) targeted Internet searches, such as
using relevant domains (.edu, .gov, and .org).
Preparing for the Interview
Before the interview, learn as much as possible about the person you are
going to interview and the organization for which he or she works.
When you contact the prospective interviewee, explain who you are,

=== Page 304 ===
6860ch0I.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:51 AM Page 271
interviewing for information 271
why you would like an interview, the subject and purpose of the inter-
view, and generally how much time it will take. You should also ask
permission if you plan to record the interview and let your interviewee
know that you will allow him or her to review your draft.
After you have made the appointment, prepare a list of questions
to ask your interviewee. Avoid vague, general questions. A question
such as “Do you think the Web would be useful for you?” is too gen-
eral to elicit useful information. It is more helpful to ask specific but
open-ended questions, such as the following: “Many physicians in your
specialty are using the Web to answer routine patient questions. How
might providing such information on your Web site affect your rela-
tionship with your patients?”
Conducting the Interview
I
Arrive promptly for the interview and be prepared to guide the discus-
sion. During the interview, take only memory-jogging notes that will
help you recall the conversation later; do not ask your interviewee to
slow down so that you can take detailed notes. As the interview is
reaching a close, take a few minutes to skim your notes and ask the in-
terviewee to clarify anything that is ambiguous.
WRITER’S CHECKLIST Interviewing Successfully
(cid:3)
Be pleasantbutpurposeful.You are there to getinformation,so don’t
be timid aboutasking leading questions on the subject.
(cid:3)
Use the listof questions you have prepared,starting with the less
complex and difficultaspects of the topic to getthe conversation
started,and then going on to the more challenging aspects.
(cid:3)
Letyour interviewee do mostof the talking.Remember thatthe inter-
viewee is the expert.See also listening.
(cid:3)
Be objective.Don’toffer your opinions on the subject.You are there to
getinformation,notto debate.
(cid:3)
Ask additional questions as they arise.
(cid:3)
Don’tgetsidetracked.If the interviewee strays too far from the sub-
ject,ask a specific question to directthe conversation back on track.
(cid:3)
If you use an audiocassette or a digital voice recorder,do notletitlure
you into relaxing so thatyou neglectto ask crucial questions.
(cid:3)
After thanking the interviewee,ask permission to contacthim or
her again to clarify a pointor two as you complete your interview
notes.

=== Page 305 ===
6860ch0I.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:51 AM Page 272
272 interviewing for a job
Expanding Your Notes Soon After the Interview
Immediately after leaving the interview, use your memory-jogging notes
to help you mentally review the interview and expand those notes. Do
not postpone this step. No matter how good your memory is, you will
forget some important points if you do not complete this step at once.
See also note-taking.
Interviewing by Phone or E-mail
When an interviewee is not available for a face-to-face meeting, an in-
terview by phone may be useful. Most of the principles for conducting
face-to-face interviews apply to phone interviews; be aware, however,
that phone calls do not offer the important nonverbal cues of face-to-
face meetings. Further, taking notes can be challenging while speaking
I
on a phone, although a phone headset or a high-quality speakerphone
can alleviate that problem.
As an alternative to a face-to-face or phone interview, consider an
e-mail interview. Such an “interview,” however, lacks the spontaneity
and the immediacy of an in-person or a phone conversation. If e-mail is
the only option, the interviewing principles in this entry can help you
elicit useful responses. Before you send any questions, make sure that
your contact is willing to participate and respond to follow-up requests
for clarification. As a courtesy, give the respondent a general idea of the
number of questions you plan to ask and the level of detail you expect.
When you send the questions, ask for a reasonable deadline from the
interviewee (“Would you be able to send your response by...?”). See
also e-mail.
interviewing for a job
Job interviews can take place in person, by phone, or by teleconference.
They may last 30 minutes, an hour, or several hours. Sometimes, an ini-
tial job interview is followed by a series of additional interviews that
can last a half or full day. Often, just one or two people conduct a job
interview, but at times a group of four or more might do so. Because it
is impossible to know exactly what to expect, it is important that you
be well prepared. See also application letters, job search, and résumés.
Before the Interview
The interview is not a one-way communication. It presents you with an
opportunity to ask questions of your potential employer. Before the inter-

=== Page 306 ===
6860ch0I.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:51 AM Page 273
interviewing for a job 273
view, learn everything you can about the organization by answering for
yourself such questions as the following:
• What kind of organization (profit, nonprofit, government) is it?
• How diversified are its activities or branches?
• Is it a locally owned business?
• Does it provide a product or service? If so, what kind?
• How large is the business? How large are its assets?
• Is the owner self-employed? Is the company a subsidiary of a larger
operation? Is it expanding?
• How long has the company been in business?
• Where will I fit in?
You can obtain information from current employees, the Internet, the I
company’s publications, and the business section of back issues of local
newspapers. The company’s Web site may help you learn about the
company’s size, sales volume, product line, credit rating, branch loca-
tions, subsidiary companies, new products and services, building pro-
grams, and similar information. You may also conduct researchusing a
company’s annual reports and other publications, such as Moody’s
Industrials, Dun and Bradstreet, Standard and Poor’s, and Thomas’
Register, as well as other business reference sources a librarian might
suggest. Ask your interviewer about what you cannot find through your
own research. Doing so demonstrates your interest and allows you to
learn more about your potential employer.
Try to anticipate the questions your interviewer might ask, and pre-
pare your answers in advance. Be sure you understand a question be-
fore answering it, and avoid responding too quickly with a rehearsed
answer—be prepared to answer in a natural and relaxed manner. Inter-
viewers typically ask the following questions:
• What are your short-term and long-term occupational goals?
• Where do you see yourself five years from now?
• What are your major strengths and weaknesses?
• Do you work better with others or alone?
• How do you spend your free time?
• What accomplishment are you particularly proud of? Describe it.
• Why are you leaving your current job?
• Why do you want to work for this organization?
• Why should I hire you?
• What salary and benefits do you expect?

=== Page 307 ===
6860ch0I.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:51 AM Page 274
274 interviewing for a job
Many employers use behavioral interviews. Rather than tradi-
tional, straightforward questions, the behavioral interview focuses on
asking the candidate to provide examples or respond to hypothetical
situations. Interviewers who use behavior-based questions are looking
for specific examples from your experience. Prepare for the behavioral
interview by recollecting challenging situations or problems that you
successfully resolved. Examples of behavior-based questions include the
following:
• Tell me about a time when you experienced conflict while on a
team.
• If I were your boss and you disagreed with a decision I made, what
would you do?
• How have you used your leadership skills to bring about change?
I
• Tell me about a time when you failed and what you learned from
the experience.
Arrive for your interview on time or even 10 or 15 minutes early—
you may be asked to fill out an application or other paperwork before
you meet your interviewer. Always bring extra copies of your résumé,
samples of your work (if applicable), and a list of references and con-
tact information. If you are asked to complete an application form,
read it carefully before you write and proofread it when you are fin-
ished. The form provides a written record for company files and in-
dicates to the company how well you follow directions and complete
a task.
During the Interview
The interview actually begins before you are seated: What you wear
and how you act make a first impression. In general, dress simply and
conservatively, avoid extremes in fragrance and cosmetics, and be well
groomed.
Behavior. First, thank the interviewer for his or her time, express your
pleasure at meeting him or her, and remain standing until you are of-
fered a seat. Then sit up straight (good posture suggests self-assurance),
look directly at the interviewer, and try to appear relaxed and confi-
dent. During the interview, you may find yourself feeling a little ner-
vous. Use that nervous energy to your advantage by channeling it into
the alertness that you will need to listen and respond effectively. Do not
attempt to take extensive notes or use a laptop computer during the in-
terview. You can jot down a few facts and figures on a small pad, but
keep your focus on the interviewer. See also listening.

=== Page 308 ===
6860ch0I.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:51 AM Page 275
interviewing for a job 275
Responses. When you answer questions, do not ramble or stray from
the subject. Say only what you must to answer each question properly
and then stop, but avoid giving just yes or no answers—they usually do
not allow the interviewer to learn enough about you. Some interviewers
allow a silence to fall just to see how you will react. The burden of con-
ducting the interview is the interviewer’s, not yours—and he or she
may interpret your rush to fill a void in the conversation as a sign of in-
security. If such a silence makes you uncomfortable, be ready to ask an
intelligent question about the company.
If the interviewer overlooks important points, bring them up. How-
ever, let the interviewer mention salary first. Doing so yourself may in-
dicate that you are more interested in the money than the work.
However, make sure you are aware of prevailing salaries and benefits in
your field. See salary negotiations.
Interviewers look for a degree of self-confidence and an applicant’s I
understanding of the field, as well as genuine interest in the field, the
company, and the job. Ask questions to communicate your interest in
the job and company. Interviewers respond favorably to applicants who
can communicate and present themselves well.
Conclusion. At the conclusion of the interview, thank the interviewer
for his or her time. Indicate that you are interested in the job (if true)
and try to get an idea of the company’s hiring time frame. Reaffirm
friendly contact with a firm handshake.
After the Interview
After you leave the interview, jot down the pertinent information you
obtained, as it may be helpful in comparing job offers. As soon as pos-
sible following a job interview, send the interviewer a note of thanks in
a brief letteror e-mail. Such notes often include the following:
• Your thanks for the interview and to individuals or groups that
gave you special help or attention during the interview
• The name of the specific job for which you interviewed
• Your impression that the job is attractive, if true
• Your confidence that you can perform the job well
• An offer to provide further information or answer further
questions
Figure I–9 shows a typical example of follow-up correspondence.
If you are offered a job you want, accept the offer verbally and
write a brief letter of acceptance as soon as possible—certainly within a
week. If you do not want the job, write a refusal letter or e-mail, as de-
scribed in acceptance / refusal letters.

=== Page 309 ===
6860ch0I.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:51 AM Page 276
276 introductions
Dear Mr.Itsuru:
Thank you for the informative and pleasantinterview we
had yesterday.Please extend my thanks to Mr.Ragins of
Human Resources as well.
I came away from our meeting mostfavorably impressed
with Calcutex Industries.I find the position of software
designer to be an attractive one and feel confidentthat
my qualifications would enable me to perform the duties
to everyone’s advantage.
If I can answer any further questions,please letme know.
Sincerely,
I
Wilson Hathaway
FIGUREI–9. Follow-up Correspondence
introductions
DIRECTORY
Routine Openings 277 Definition 279
Opening Strategies 277 Anecdote 279
Objective 277 Quotation 279
Problem Statement 277 Forecast 279
Scope 277 Persuasive Hook 280
Background 278 Full-Scale Introductions 280
Summary 278 Manuals and Specifications 280
Interesting Detail 278
Every document must have either an opening or an introduction. In
general, correspondence and routine reports need only an opening;
more complex reports and other longer documents need an introduc-
tion. An opening usually simply focuses the reader’s attention on your
topic and then proceeds to the body of your document. A formal intro-
duction, however, sets the stage by providing necessary information to
understand the discussion that follows in the body. Introductions are re-
quired for such documents as formal reportsand major proposals. For a
discussion of comparable sections for Web sites, see writing for the Web
and Web design. See also conclusions.

=== Page 310 ===
6860ch0I.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:51 AM Page 277
introductions 277
Routine Openings
When your audienceis familiar with your topic or if what you are writ-
ing is brief or routine, then a simple opening will provide adequate con-
text, as shown in the following examples.
LETTER
Dear Mr. Ignatowski:
You will be happy to know that we have corrected the error in
your bank balance. The new balance shows...
MEMO
To date, 18 of the 20 specimens your department submitted for
analysis have been examined. Our preliminary analysis indicates...
E-MAIL
I
Jane, as I promised in my e-mail yesterday, I’ve attached the engi-
neering division budget estimates for fiscal year 2008.
Opening Strategies
Opening strategies are aimed at focusing the readers’ attention and mo-
tivating them to read the entire document.
Objective. In reporting on a project, you might open with a statement
of the project’s objective so that the readers have a basis for judging the
results.
(cid:2) The primary goal of this project was to develop new techniques
to solve the problem of waste disposal. Our first step was to
investigate...
Problem Statement. One way to give readers the perspective of your
report is to present a brief account of the problem that led to the study
or project being reported.
(cid:2) Several weeks ago a manager noticed a recurring problem in the
software developed by Datacom Systems. Specifically, error mes-
sages repeatedly appeared when, in fact, no specific trouble....
After an extensive investigation, we found that Datacom Systems...
For proposals or formal reports, of course, problem statements may be
more elaborate and a part of the full-scale introduction, which is dis-
cussed later in this entry.
Scope. You may want to present the scope of your document in your
opening. By providing the parameters of your material, the limitations

=== Page 311 ===
6860ch0I.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:51 AM Page 278
278 introductions
of the subject, or the amount of detail to be presented, you enable your
readers to determine whether they want or need to read your docu-
ment.
(cid:2) This pamphlet provides a review of the requirements for obtaining
a private pilot’s license. It is not intended as a textbook to prepare
you for the examination itself; rather, it outlines the steps you need
to take and the costs involved.
Background. The background or history of a subject may be interest-
ing and lend perspective and insight to a subject. Consider the follow-
ing example from a newsletter describing the process of oil drilling:
(cid:2) From the bamboo poles the Chinese used when the pyramids were
young to today’s giant rigs drilling in hundreds of feet of water,
I
there has been considerable progress in the search for oil. But
whether in ancient China or a modern city, underwater or on a
mountaintop, the objective of drilling has always been the same—
to manufacture a hole in the ground, inch by inch.
Summary. You can provide a summary opening by describing in ab-
breviated form the results, conclusions, or recommendations of your ar-
ticle or report. Be concise: Do not begin a summary by writing “This
report summarizes....”
CHANGE This report summarizes the advantages offered by the
photon as a means of examining the structural features
of the atom.
TO As a means of examining the structure of the atom, the
photon offers several advantages.
Interesting Detail. Often an interesting detail will attract the readers’
attention and arouse their curiosity. Readers of a white paperfor a man-
ufacturer of telescopes and scientific instruments, for example, may be
persuaded to invest if they believe that the company is developing inno-
vative, cutting-edge products.
(cid:2) The rings of Saturn have puzzled astronomers ever since they were
discovered by Galileo in 1610 using the first telescope. Recently,
even more rings have been discovered....
Our company’s Scientific Instrument Division designs and man-
ufactures research-quality, computer-controlled telescopes that
promise to solve the puzzles of Saturn’s rings by enabling scientists
to use multicolor differential photometry to determine the rings’
origins and compositions.

=== Page 312 ===
6860ch0I.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:51 AM Page 279
introductions 279
Definition. Although a definition can be useful as an opening, do not
define something with which your audience is familiar or provide a defi-
nition that is obviously a contrived opening (such as “Webster defines
technologyas...”). A definition should be used as an opening only if it
offers insight into what follows.
(cid:2) Riskis often a loosely defined term. In this report, risk refers to
a qualitative combination of the probability of an event and the
severity of the consequences of that event. In fact,...
Anecdote. An anecdote can be used to attract and build interest in a
subject that may otherwise be mundane; however, this strategy is best
suited to longer documents and presentations.
(cid:2) In his poem “The Calf Path” (1895), Sam Walter Foss tells of
a wandering, wobbly calf trying to find its way home at night I
through the lonesome woods. It made a crooked path, which was
taken up the next day by a lone dog. Then “a bellwether sheep
pursued the trail over vale and steep, drawing behind him the
flock, too, as all good bellwethers do.” This forest path became
a country lane that bent and turned and turned again. The lane
became a village street, and at last the main street of a flourishing
city. The poet ends by saying, “A hundred thousand men were led
by a calf near three centuries dead.”
Many companies today follow a “calf path” because they react
to events rather than planning....
Quotation. Occasionally, you can use a quotation to stimulate interest
in your subject. To be effective, however, the quotation must be perti-
nent—not some loosely related remark selected from a book of quota-
tions.
(cid:2) Deborah Andrews predicted that “technical communicators in the
twenty-first century must reach audiences and collaborate across
borders of culture, language, and technology” [B3]. One way we
are accomplishing that goal is to make sure our training includes
cross-cultural experiences that provide...
Forecast. Sometimes you can use a forecast of a new development or
trend to gain the audience’s attention and interest.
(cid:2) In the not-too-distant future, we may be able to use a handheld
medical diagnostic device similar to those in science fiction to
assess the complete physical condition of accident victims. This
project and others are now being developed at The Seldi Group,
Inc.

=== Page 313 ===
6860ch0I.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:51 AM Page 280
280 introductions
Persuasive Hook. While all opening strategies contain persuasive ele-
ments, the hook uses persuasion most overtly. A brochure touting the
newest innovation in tax-preparation software might address readers as
follows:
(cid:2) Welcome to the newest way to do your taxes! TaxPro EZ ends the
headache of last-minute tax preparation with its unique Web-Link
feature.
Full-Scale Introductions
The purpose of a full-scale introduction is to give readers enough gen-
eral information about the subject to enable them to understand the de-
tails in the body of the document. An introduction should accomplish
any or all of the following:
I
• State the subject. Provide background information, such as defini-
tion, history, or theory, to provide context for your readers.
• State the purpose. Make your readers aware of why the document
exists and whether the material provides a new perspective or clari-
fies an existing perspective.
• State the scope. Tell readers the amount of detail you plan to cover.
• Preview the development of the subject. Especially in a longer doc-
ument, outline how you plan to develop the subject. Providing
such information allows readers to anticipate how the subject will
be presented and helps them evaluate your conclusions or recom-
mendations.
Consider writing an opening or introduction last. Many writers find
that it is only when they have drafted the body of the document that
they have a full enough perspective on the subject to introduce it ade-
quately.
Manuals and Specifications
You may need to write one kind of introduction for reports, academic
papers, or trade journal articles and a different kind for manuals or
specifications. When writing an introduction for a manual or set of
specifications, identify the topic and its primary purpose or function in
the first sentence or two. Be specific, but do not go into elaborate detail.
Your introduction sets the stage for the entire document, and it should
provide readers with a broad frame of reference and an understanding
of the overall topic. Then the reader is ready for technical details in the
body of the document.
How technical your introduction should be depends on your read-
ers: What are their technical backgrounds? What kind of information

=== Page 314 ===
6860ch0I.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:51 AM Page 281
investigative reports 281
are they seeking in the manual or specification? The topic should be in-
troduced with a specific audience in mind—a computer user, for ex-
ample, has different interests in an application program and a different
technical vocabulary than a programmer. Whether you need to provide
explanations or definitions of terminology will depend on your in-
tended audience. The following example is written for readers who un-
derstand such terms as “constructor” and “software modules.”
(cid:2) The System Constructor is a program that can be used to create
operating systems for a specific range of microcomputer systems.
The constructor selects requested operating software modules
from an existing file of software modules and combines those mod-
ules with a previously compiled application program to create a
functional operating system designed for a specific hardware con-
figuration. It selects the requested software modules, establishes the
I
necessary linkage between the modules, and generates the control
tables for the system according to parameters specified at run time.
You may encounter a dilemma that is common in technical writing: Al-
though you cannot explain topic A until you have explained topic B,
you cannot explain topic B before explaining topic A. The solution is to
explain both topics in broad, general terms in the introduction, as in the
following paragraph that introduces “source units” and “destination
units”:
(cid:2) The NEAT/3 programming language, which treats all peripheral
units as file storage units, allows your program to perform data
input or output operations depending on the specific unit. Periph-
eral units from which your program can only input data are
referred to as source units; those to which your program can
only output data are referred to as destination units.
Then, when you need to write a detailed explanation of topic A (source
units), you will be able to do so because your reader will know just
enough about both topics A and B to be able to understand your de-
tailed explanation.
investigative reports
An investigative reportoffers a precise analysis of a workplace problem
or an issue in response to a request or need for information. The inves-
tigative report shown in Figure I–10 evaluates whether a company
should adopt a program called Basic Englishto train and prepare docu-
mentation for non–English-speaking readers. See also laboratory reports.

=== Page 315 ===
6860ch0I.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:51 AM Page 282
282 investigative reports
Memo
To: Noreen Rinaldo, Training Manager
From: Charles Lapinski, Senior Instructor CL
Date: February 10, 2009
Subject: Adler’s Basic English Program
As requested, I have investigated Adler Medical Instruments’(AMI’s) Basic English
Program to determine whether we might adopt a similar program.
The purpose of AMI’s program is to teach medical technologists outside the United
States who do not speak or read English to understand procedures written in a special
800-word vocabulary called Basic English.This program eliminates the need for AMI to
translate its documentation into a number of different languages. The Basic English Pro-
gram does not attempt to teach the medical technologists to be fluent in English but,
I rather, to recognize the 800 basic words that appear in Adler’s documentation.
Course Analysis
The course teaches technologists a basic medical vocabulary in English; it does not pro-
vide training in medical terminology. Students must already know, in their own lan-
guage, the meaning of medical vocabulary (e.g., the meaning of the word hemostat).
Students must also have basic knowledge of their specialty, must be able to identify a
part in an illustrated parts book, must have used AMI products for at least one year, and
must be able to read and write in their own language.
Students are given an instruction manual, an illustrated book of equipment with parts
and their English names, and pocket references containing the 800 words of the Basic
English vocabulary plus the English names of parts. Students can write the correspond-
ing word in their language beside the English word and then use the pocket reference as
a bilingual dictionary. The course consists of 30 two-hour lessons, each lesson introduc-
ing approximately 27 words. No effort is made to teach pronunciation; the course
teaches only recognition of the 800 words, which include 450 nouns; 70 verbs; 180 ad-
jectives and adverbs; and 100 articles, prepositions, conjunctions, and pronouns.
Course Success
The 800-word vocabulary enables the writers of documentation to provide medical tech-
nologists with any information that might be required because the subject areas are
strictly limited to usage, troubleshooting, safety, and operation of AMI medical equip-
ment. All nonessential words (apple,father,mountain, and so on) are eliminated, as are
most synonyms (for example, under appears, but beneath does not).
Conclusions and Recommendations
AMI’s program appears to be quite successful, and a similar approach could also be ap-
propriate for us. I see two possible ways in which we could use some or all of the ele-
ments of AMI’s program: (1) in the preparation of our student manuals or (2) as AMI
uses the program.
I think it would be unnecessary to use the Basic English methods in the preparation
of manuals for all of our students. Most of our students are English speakers to whom an
unrestricted vocabulary presents no problem.
As for our initiating a program similar to AMI’s, we could create our own version of
the Basic English vocabulary and write our instructional materials in it. Because our
product lines are much broader than AMI’s, however, we would need to create illustrated
parts books for each of the different product lines.
FIGUREI–10. Investigative Report

=== Page 316 ===
6860ch0I.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:51 AM Page 283
italics 283
Open an investigative report with a statement of its primary and (if
any) secondary purposes, then define the scopeof your investigation. If
the report includes a survey of opinions, for example, indicate the num-
ber of people surveyed and other identifying information, such as in-
come categories and occupations. (See also questionnaires.) Include any
information that is pertinent in defining the extent of the investigation.
Then report your findings and discuss their significance with your
conclusions.
Sometimes the person requesting the investigative report may ask
you to make recommendations as a result of your findings. In that case,
the report may be referred to as a recommendation report. See also
feasibility reportsand trouble reports.
I
italics
Italics is a style of type used to denote emphasisand to distinguish for-
eign expressions, book titles, and certain other elements. This sentence
is printed in italics.Italic type is often signaled by underlining in manu-
scripts submitted for publication or where italic font is not available
(see also e-mail). You may need to italicize words that require special
emphasis in a sentence. (“Contrary to projections, sales have not im-
proved.”) Do not overuse italics for emphasis, however. (“Thiswill hurt
youmore than me.”)
Foreign Words and Phrases
Foreign words and phrases are italicized (bonjour, guten tag, the sign
said “Se habla español”). Foreign words that have been fully assimi-
lated into English need not be italicized (cliché, etiquette, vis-à-vis, de
facto, résumé). When in doubt about whether to italicize a word, con-
sult a current dictionary. See also foreign words in English.
Titles
Italicize the titlesof separately published documents, such as books, pe-
riodicals, newspapers, pamphlets, brochures, legal cases, movies, and
television programs.
(cid:2) The book Turning Workplace Conflicts into Collaborationwas re-
viewed in the New York Times.
Abbreviationsof such titles are italicized if their spelled-out forms would
be italicized.
(cid:2) The NYTis one of the nation’s oldest newspapers.

=== Page 317 ===
6860ch0I.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:51 AM Page 284
284 its / it’s
Italicize the titles of compact discs, videotapes, plays, long poems,
paintings, sculptures, and long musical works.
CD-ROM Computer Security Tutorial on CD-ROM
PLAY Arthur Miller’s Death of a Salesman
LONG POEM T. S. Eliot’s The Wasteland
MUSICAL WORK Gershwin’s Porgy and Bess
Use quotation marksfor parts of publications, such as chapters of books
and articles or sections within periodicals.
Proper Names
The names of ships, trains, and aircraft (but not the companies or gov-
ernments that own them) are italicized (U.S. aircraft carrier Indepen-
I
dence, U.S. space shuttle Endeavour). Craft that are known by model
or serial designations are not italicized (DC-7, Boeing 747).
Words,Letters,and Figures
Words, letters, and figures discussed as such are italicized.
(cid:2) The word inflammableis often misinterpreted.
(cid:2) The Sand 6keys on my keyboard do not function.
Subheads
Subheads in a report are sometimes italicized.
(cid:2) Training Managers. We are leading the way in developing first-line
managers who not only are professionally competent but....
See also headingsand layoutand design.
its / it’s
Itsis a possessive pronounand does not use an apostrophe. It’sis a con-
tractionof it is.
(cid:2) It’sessential that the lab maintain itsquality control.
See also expletivesand possessive case.

=== Page 318 ===
6860ch0JK.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 285
J
jargon
Jargon is a highly specialized slang that is unique to an occupational or
a professional group. Jargon is at first understood only by insiders; over
time, it may become known more widely. For example, computer pro-
grammers adopted the term debugging to describe the discovery and
correction of errors in software. If all your readers are members of a
particular occupational group, jargon may provide an efficient means J
of communicating. However, if you have any doubt that your entire au-
dience is part of such a group, avoid using jargon. See also affectation,
functional shift, and gobbledygook.
job descriptions
Most large companies and many small ones use formal job descriptions
to specify the duties of and requirements for many of the jobs in the
firm.* Job descriptions fulfill several important functions: They provide
information on which equitable salary scales can be based; they help
management determine whether all functions within a company are ad-
equately supported; and they let both prospective and current employ-
ees know exactly what is expected of them. Together, all the job
descriptions in a firm present a picture of the organization’s structure.
Sometimes middle managers are given the task of writing job de-
scriptions for their employees. In many organizations, though, employ-
ees are required to draft their own job descriptions, which supervisors
then check and approve.
Although job-description formats vary from organization to orga-
nization, they commonly contain the following sections:
• The accountability sectionidentifies, by title only, the person to
whom the employee reports.
*Job descriptions are sometimes called position descriptions, a term also used for for-
mal announcements of openings for professional or administrative positions.
285

=== Page 319 ===
6860ch0JK.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 286
286 job search
• The scope of responsibilitiessection provides an overview of the
primary and secondary functions of the job and states, if appli-
cable, who reports to the employee.
• The specific dutiessection gives a detailed account of the particular
duties of the job as concisely as possible.
• The personal requirementssection lists the required or preferred
education, training, experience, and licensing for the job.
The job description shown in Figure J–1 is typical. It never mentions the
person holding the job described; it focuses, instead, on the job and the
qualifications required to fill the position.
WRITER’S CHECKLIST Writing Job Descriptions
(cid:2)
Before attempting to write your job description,listall the different
tasks you do in a week or a month.Otherwise,you will almostcer-
J
tainly leave outsome of your duties.
(cid:2)
Focus on content.Remember thatyou are describing your job,not
yourself.
(cid:2)
Listyour duties in decreasing order of importance.Knowing how your
various duties rank in importance makes iteasier to setvalid job
qualifications.
(cid:2)
Begin each statementof a duty with a verband be specific.Write
“Orientnew staff members to the department”rather than “New
staff orientation.”
(cid:2)
Review existing job descriptions thatare considered well written.
job search
Whether you are applying for your first job or want to change careers
entirely, begin by assessing your skills, interests, and abilities, perhaps
through brainstorming.* Next, consider your career goals and values.
For instance, do you prefer working independently or collaboratively?
Do you enjoy public settings? Do you like meeting people? How impor-
tant are career stability and location? What would you most like to be
doing in the immediate future? in two years? in five years?
*A good source for stimulating your thinking is the most recent edition of What
Color Is Your Parachute? A Practical Manual for Job-Hunters & Career-Changersby
Richard Nelson Bolles, published by Ten Speed Press.

=== Page 320 ===
6860ch0JK.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 287
job description 287
Manager, Technical Publications
Dakota Electrical Corporation
Accountability
Reports directly to the Vice President, Customer Service.
Scope of Responsibilities
The Manager of Technical Publications plans, coordinates, and supervises
the design and development of technical publications and documentation
required to support the sale, installation, and maintenance of Dakota
products. The manager is responsible for the administration and morale
of the staff. The supervisor for instruction manuals and the supervisor for
parts manuals report directly to the manager.
Specific Duties
• Directs an organization currently comprising 20 people (including two
supervisors), over 75 percent of whom are writing professionals and J
graphic artists
• Screens, selects, and hires qualified applicants for the department
• Prepares a formal orientation program to familiarize writing trainees
with the production of reproducible copy and graphic arts
• Evaluates the performance of and determines the salary adjustments for
all department employees
• Plans documentation to support new and existing products
• Subcontracts publications and acts as a purchasing agent when needed
• Offers editorial advice to supervisors
• Develops and manages an annual budget for the Technical Publications
Department
• Cooperates with the Engineering, Parts, and Service Departments to
provide the necessary repair and spare-parts manuals upon the introduc-
tion of new equipment
• Serves as a liaison among technical specialists, the publications staff,
and field engineers
• Recommends new and appropriate uses for the department within the
company
• Keeps up with new technologies in printing, typesetting, art, and graph-
ics and uses them to the advantage of Dakota Electrical Corporation
where applicable
Requirements
• B.A. in professional writing or equivalent
• Minimum of three years’professional writing experience and a general
knowledge of graphics, production, and Web design
• Minimum of two years’management experience with a knowledge of the
general principles of management
• Strong interpersonal skills
FIGURE J–1. Job Description

=== Page 321 ===
6860ch0JK.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 288
288 job search
Once you have reflected and brainstormed about the job that is
right for you, a number of sources can help you locate the job you
want. Of course, you should not rely on any one of the following
sources exclusively:
• Networking and informational interviews
• Campus career services
• Web resources
• Job advertisements
• Trade and professional journal listings
• Employment agencies (private, temporary, government)
• Letters of inquiry
Keep a file during your job search of dated job ads, copies of applica-
tion lettersand résumés, and the names of important contacts. This col-
J lection can serve as a future resource and reminder.
Networking and Informational Interviews
Networking involves communicating with people who might provide
useful advice or may know of potential jobs in your interest areas. They
may include people already working in your chosen field, contacts in
professional organizations, professors, family members, or friends. Dis-
cussion groups and Web job-networking sites can be helpful in this
process. Use your contacts to expand your network of contacts. Most
career professionals estimate that between 60 and 80 percent of all open
positions are filled through networking.
Informational interviews are appointments you schedule with
working professionals who can give you “insider” views of an occupa-
tion or industry. These brief meetings (usually 20 to 30 minutes) also
offer you the opportunity to learn about employment trends as well as
leads for employment opportunities. Because you ask the questions,
these interviews allow you to participate in an interview situation that
is less stressful than the job interview itself. To make the most of infor-
mational interviews, prepare carefully and review both interviewing for
informationand interviewing for a job.
Campus Career Services
A visit to a college career-development center is another good way to
begin your job search. Government, business, and industry recruiters
often visit campus career offices to interview prospective employees; re-
cruiters also keep career counselors aware of their companies’ current
employment needs and submit job descriptions to them. Not only can
career counselors help you select a career, but they can also put you in

=== Page 322 ===
6860ch0JK.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 289
job search 289
touch with the best and most current resources—identifying where to
begin your search and saving you time. Career-development centers
often hold workshops on résumé preparation and offer other job-finding
resources on their Web sites.
Web Resources
Using the Web can enhance your job search in a number of ways. First,
you can consult sites that give advice about careers, job seeking, and ré-
sumé preparation. Second, you can learn about businesses and organi-
zations that may hire employees in your area by visiting their Web sites.
Such sites often list job openings, provide instructions for applicants,
and offer other information, such as employee benefits. Third, you can
learn about jobs in your field and post your résumé for prospective em-
ployers at employment databases, such as Monster.com or America’s
Job Bank. Fourth, you can post your résumé at your personal Web site.
Although posting your résumé at an employment database will un-
J
doubtedly attract more potential employers, including your résumé at
your own site has benefits. For example, you might provide a link to
your site in e-mail correspondence or provide your Web site’s URL in
an inquiry letter to a prospective employer. If you use a personal Web
site, however, it should contain only material that would be of interest
to prospective employers, such as examples of your work, awards, and
other professional items.
ETHICS NOTE Be careful with the material that you post at such online
social communities as MySpace, Facebook, and YouTube. Potential em-
ployers often conduct Web searches that could access content at such
Web sites, so you need to be aware of how you present yourself in on-
line public spaces. ✦
Employment specialists suggest that you spend time on the Web in
the evening or early morning so that you can focus on in-person con-
tacts during working hours.
WEB LINK Finding a Job
For job-hunting tips,sample documents,and links to the sites men-
tioned in this entry,see bedfordstmartins.com/alredtechand selectFind-
ing an Internship or Joband Links for Handbook Entries.
Job Advertisements
Many employers advertise jobs in the classified sections of newspapers.
Because job listings can differ, search in both the printed and Web edi-
tions of local and big-city newspapers under employmentor job market.

=== Page 323 ===
6860ch0JK.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 290
290 job search
Use the search options they provide or the general strategies for data-
base searches discussed in the entry research.
A clinical medical technologist seeking a job, for example, might
find the specialty listed under “Medical Technologist” or “Clinical Lab-
oratory Technologist.” Depending on a hospital’s or pathologist’s needs,
the listing could be even more specific, such as “Blood Bank Technolo-
gist” or “Hematology Technologist.”
As you read the ads, take notes on salary ranges, job locations, job
duties and responsibilities, and even the terminology used in the ads to
describe the work. A knowledge of keywords and key expressions that
are generally used to describe a particular type of work can be helpful
when you prepare your résumé and letters of application.
Trade and Professional Journal Listings
In many industries, associations publish periodicals of interest to people
working in the industry. Such periodicals (print and online) often con-
J
tain job listings. To learn about the trade or professional associations
for your occupation, consult resources on the Web, such as Google’s Di-
rectory of Professional Organizations or online resources offered by
your library or campus career office. You may also consult the follow-
ing references at a library: Encyclopedia of Associations, Encyclopedia
of Business Information Sources, and National Directory of Employ-
ment Services.
EmploymentAgencies (Private,
Temporary,Government)
Private employment agencies are profit-making organizations that are
in business to help people find jobs—for a fee. Reputable agencies pro-
vide you with job leads, help you organize your job search, and supply
information on companies doing the hiring. A staffing agency or tem-
porary placement agency could match you with an appropriate tempo-
rary or permanent job in your field. Temporary work for an organiza-
tion for which you might want to work permanently is an excellent way
to build your network while continuing your job search.
Choose an employment or a temporary-placement agency carefully.
Some are well established and reputable; others are not. Check with
your local Better Business Bureau and your college career office before
you sign an agreement with a private employment agency. Further, be
sure you understand who is paying the agency’s fee. Often the employer
pays the agency’s fee; however, if you have to pay, make sure you know
exactly how much. As with any written agreement, read the fine print
carefully.

=== Page 324 ===
6860ch0JK.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 291
journal articles 291
Local, state, and federal government agencies also offer many free
or low-cost employment services. Local government agencies are listed
in telephone and Web directories under the name of your city, county,
or state. For information on occupational trends, see the Occupational
Outlook Handbook at http://bls.gov/OCO, and for information on jobs
with the federal government, see the U.S. Office of Personnel Manage-
ment Web site at http://usajobs.opm.gov. See also salary negotiations.
Letters of Inquiry
If you would like to work for a particular firm, write and ask whether it
has any openings for people with your qualifications. Normally, you
can send the letter to the department head, the director of human re-
sources, or both; for a small firm, however, write to the head of the
firm. Such letters work best if you have networked as described earlier
in this entry.
J
journal articles (see trade journal articles)

=== Page 325 ===
6860ch0JK.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 292
K
kind of / sort of
The phrases kind of and sort of should be used only to refer to a class
or type of things.
(cid:3) He described a special kind of mirror called a quantum switch.
Do not use kind ofor sort ofto mean “rather,” “somewhat,” or “some-
how.” That usage can lead to vagueness; it is better to be specific.
VAGUE It was kind ofa bad year for the company.
SPECIFIC The company’s profits fell 10 percent last year.
K
know-how
The informal term know-how, meaning “special competence or knowl-
edge,” should be avoided in formal writing style.
skill.
(cid:3) The applicant has impressive technical know-how.
^
292

=== Page 326 ===
6860ch0L.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 293
L
laboratory reports
A laboratory report communicates information acquired from labora-
tory testing or a major investigation. It should begin by stating the rea-
son that a laboratory investigation was conducted; it should also list the
equipment and methods used during the test, the problems encoun-
tered, the results and conclusions reached, and any recommendations.
The example in Figure L–1 shows sections from a typical laboratory re-
port.
A laboratory report emphasizes the equipment and procedures used
in the investigation because those two factors can be critical in deter-
mining the accuracy of the data and even replicating the procedure if
necessary. Although this emphasis often requires the use of the passive
voice, you should present the results of the laboratory investigation L
clearly and precisely. If your report requires graphs or tables, integrate
them into your report as described in the entry visuals. For reporting
routine or simple laboratory tests, see testreports.
lay / lie
Lay is a transitive verb—a verb that requires a direct object to com-
plete its meaning—that means “place” or “put.”
(cid:2) We will laythe foundation one section at a time.
The past-tense form of layis laid.
(cid:2) We laidthe first section of the foundation last month.
The perfect-tense form of layis also laid.
(cid:2) Since June, we have laidall but two sections of the foundation.
Lay is frequently confused with lie, which is an intransitive verb—a
verb that does not require an object to complete its meaning—that
means “recline” or “remain.”
(cid:2) A person in shock should liedown with legs slightly elevated.
293

=== Page 327 ===
6860ch0L.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 294
294 laboratory reports
PCB Exposure from Oil Combustion
Wayne County Firefighters Association
Submitted to:
Mr. Philip Landowe
President, Wayne County Firefighters Association
Wandell, IN 45602
Submitted by:
Analytical Laboratories, Incorporated
1220 Pfeiffer Parkway
Indianapolis, IN 46223
February 27, 2009
INTRODUCTION
Waste oil used to train firefighters was suspected by the Wayne County Firefighters As-
sociation of containing polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs). According to information
provided by Mr. Philip Landowe, President of the Association, it has been standard
practice in training firefighters to burn 20–100 gallons of oil in a diked area of approxi-
mately 25–50 m3. Firefighters would then extinguish the fire at close range. Exposure
would last several minutes, and the exercise would be repeated two or three times each
day for one week.
Oil samples were collected from three holding tanks near the training area in Engle-
wood Park on November 14, 2008. To determine potential firefighter exposure to PCBs,
bulk oil analyses were conducted on each of the samples. In addition, the oil was heated
L and burned to determine the degree to which PCB is volatized from the oil, thus in-
creasing the potential for firefighter exposure via inhalation.
TESTING PROCEDURES
Bulk oil samples were diluted with hexane, put through a cleanup step, and analyzed in
electron-capture gas chromatography. The oil from the underground tank that contained
PCBs was then exposed to temperatures of 1008°C without ignition and 2008°C with
ignition. Air was passed over the enclosed sample during heating, and volatized PCB
was trapped in an absorbing medium. The absorbing medium was then extracted and
analyzed for PCB released from the sample.
RESULTS
Bulk oil analyses are presented in Table 1. Only the sample from the underground tank
contained detectable amounts of PCB. Aroclor 1260, containing 60 percent chlorine,
was found to be present in this sample at 18 mg. Concentrations of 50 mg PCB in oil
are considered hazardous. Stringent storage and disposal techniques are required for oil
with PCB concentrations at these levels.
TABLE 1. Bulk Oil Analyses
Source Sample # PCB Content (mg/g)
Underground tank 6062 18*
(11' deep)
Circle tank 6063a <1
(3' deep) 6063b <1
Square pool 6064a <1
(3' deep) 6064b <1
*Aroclor 1260 is the PCB type. This sample was taken for volatilization study.
FIGURE L–1. Laboratory Report

=== Page 328 ===
6860ch0L.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 295
layoutand design 295
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
At a concentration of 18 mg/g, 100 gallons of oil would contain approximately 5.5 g of
PCB. Of the 5.5 g of PCB, about 0.3 g would be released to the atmosphere under the
worst conditions.
The American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists has established
athreshold limit value (TLV)* of 0.5 mg/m3air for a PCB containing 54 percent C1 as a
time-weighted average over an 8-hour work shift and has stipulated that exposure over a
15-minute period should not exceed 1 mg/m3. The 0.3 g of released PCB would have to
be diluted to 600 m3air to result in a concentration of 0.5 mg/m3or less. Because the
combustion of oil lasted several minutes, a dilution to more than 600 m3is likely; thus,
exposure would be less than 0.5 mg/m3.
In summary, because exposure to this oil was limited and because PCB concentra-
tions in the oil were low, it is unlikely that exposure from inhalation would be sufficient
to cause adverse health effects. However, we cannot rule out the possibility that excessive
exposure may have occurred under certain circumstances, based on factors such as ex-
cessive skin contact and the possibility that oil with a higher-level PCB concentration
could have been used earlier. The practice of using this oil should be terminated.
*The safe average concentration that most individuals can be exposed to in an 8-hour day. L
FIGURE L–1. Laboratory Report(continued)
The past-tense form of lie is lay (not lied). This form causes the confu-
sion between lieand lay.
(cid:2) The injured employee laystill for approximately five minutes.
The perfect-tense form of lieis lain.
(cid:2) The injured employee had lainstill for five minutes before the
EMTs arrived.
layout and design
DIRECTORY
Typography 296 Headers and Footers 298
Typeface and Type Size 296 Lists 299
Type Style and Emphasis 297 Columns 299
Page-Design Elements 298 White Space 299
Justification 298 Color 299
Headings 298

=== Page 329 ===
6860ch0L.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 296
296 layoutand design
Visuals 299 Rules 300
Icons 299 Page Layoutand Thumbnails 300
Captions 300
The layout and design of a document can make even the most complex
information accessible and give readers a favorable impression of the
writer and the organization. To accomplish those goals, a design should
help readers find information easily; offer a simple and uncluttered pre-
sentation; and highlight structure, hierarchy, and order. The design
must also fit the purposeof the document and its context. For example,
if clients are paying a high price for consulting services, they may expect
a sophisticated, polished design; if employees inside an organization ex-
pect management to be frugal, they may accept—even expect—an eco-
nomical and standard company design. See also audience.
Effective design is based on visual simplicity and harmony and can
be achieved with careful selection of typography, page-design elements,
and appropriate visuals, as well as thoughtful layout of text and visual
components on a page.
Typography
L
Typography refers to the style and arrangement of type on a page. A
complete set of all the letters, numbers, and symbols available in one
typeface (or style) is called a font. The letters in a typeface have a num-
ber of distinctive characteristics, as shown in Figure L–2.
FIGUREL–2. Primary Components of Letter Characters
Typeface and Type Size. For most on-the-job writing, select a typeface
primarily for its legibility. Avoid typefaces that may distract readers. In-
stead, choose popular typefaces with which readers are familiar, such as

=== Page 330 ===
6860ch0L.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 297
layoutand design 297
Times Roman, Garamond, or Gill Sans. Avoid using more than two
typefaces in the text of a document. For certain documents, however,
such as newsletters, you may wish to use distinctively different type-
faces for contrast among various elements such as headlines, headings,
inset quotations, and sidebars. Experiment before making final deci-
sions, keeping in mind your audience.
One way typefaces are characterized is by the presence or absence
of serifs. Serif typefaces have projections, as shown in Figure L–2; sans
serif styles do not. (Sansis French for “without.”) The text of this book
is set in Sabon, a serif typeface. Although sans serif type has a modern
look, serif type is easier to read, especially in the smaller sizes. Sans
serif, however, works well for headings (like the entry titles in this book)
and for Web sites and other documents read on-screen.
Ideal font sizes for the main text of paper documents range from 10
to 12 points.* However, for some elements or documents, you may
wish to select typeface sizes that are smaller (as in footnotes) or larger
(as in headlines for brochures). See Figure L–3 for a comparison of type
sizes in a serif typeface. Your readers and the distance from which they
will read a document should help determine type size. For example, in-
structions that will rest on a table at which the reader stands require a
larger typeface than a document that will be read up close. For presen- L
tationsand writing for the Web, preview your document to see the effec-
tiveness of your choice of point sizes and typefaces.
6 pt.This size might be used for dating a source.
8 pt.This size might be used for footnotes.
10 pt.This size might be used for figure captions.
12 pt.This size might be used for main text.
14 pt.This size might be used for headings.
FIGURE L–3. Type Sizes (6- to 14-PointType)
Type Style and Emphasis. One method of achieving emphasis through
typography is to use capital letters. HOWEVER, LONG STRETCHES
OF ALL UPPERCASE LETTERS ARE DIFFICULT TO READ. (See
also e-mail.) Use all uppercase letters only in short spans, such as in
headings. Likewise, use italics sparingly because continuous italic type
reduces legibility and thus slows readers. Of course, italics are useful if
*A pointis a unit of type size equal to 0.01384 inch, or approximately 1/72of an inch.

=== Page 331 ===
6860ch0L.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 298
298 layoutand design
your aim is to slow readers, as in cautions and warnings. Boldface, used
in moderation, may be the best cuing device because it is visually differ-
ent yet retains the customary shapes of letters and numbers.
Page-Design Elements
Thoughtfully used design elements can provide not only emphasis but
also visual logic within a document by highlighting organization. Con-
sistency and moderation are important—use the same technique to
highlight a particular feature throughout your document and be careful
not to overuse any single technique. The following typical elements can
be used to make your document accessible and effective: justification,
headings, headers and footers, lists, columns, white space, and color.
Some of these elements are illustrated in Figure F–5 on page 201. For
advice on design elements for Web pages, see Web design.
Justification. Left-justified (ragged-right) margins are generally easier
to read than full-justified margins, especially for text using wide mar-
gins on 81⁄2 × 11′′ pages. Left justification is also better if full justifica-
tion causes your word-processing or desktop-publishing software to
insert irregular spaces between words, producing unwanted white space
L
or unevenness in blocks of text. Full-justified text is more appropriate
for publications aimed at a broad audience that expects a more for-
mal, polished appearance. Full justification is also useful with narrow,
multiple-column formats because the spaces between the columns
(called alleys) need the definition that full justification provides.
Headings. Headings reveal the organization of a document and help
readers decide which sections they need to read. You should provide ty-
pographic contrast between headings and the body text with either a
different typeface or a different style (bold, italic, CAPS, and so on).
Headings are often effective in boldface or in a sans serif typeface that
contrasts with a body text in a serif typeface.
Headers and Footers. A header in a report, letter, or other document
appears at the top of each page (as in this book), and a footer appears
at the bottom of each page. Document pages may have headers or foot-
ers (or both) that include such elements as the topic or subtopic of a
section, an identifying number, the date the document was written, the
page number, and the document name. Keep your headers and footers
concise because too much information in them can create visual clutter.
However—at a minimum—a multipage document should include the
page number in a header or footer. For more information on adding
page numbers and laying out a page, see “Web Link: Designing Docu-
ments” on page 300. Headers are also important in lettersand memos.

=== Page 332 ===
6860ch0L.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 299
layoutand design 299
Lists. Vertically stacked words, phrases, and other items with numbers
or bullets can effectively highlight such information as steps in se-
quence, materials or parts needed, key or concluding points, and rec-
ommendations. For further detail, see lists.
Columns. As you design pages, consider how columns may improve the
readability of your document. A single-column format works well with
larger typefaces, double-spacing, and left-justified margins. For smaller
typefaces and single-spaced lines, the two-column structure keeps text
columns narrow enough so that readers need not scan back and forth
across the width of the entire page for every line. Avoid widows and or-
phans: a widow is a single word carried over to the top of a column or
page; an orphanis a word on a line by itself at the end of a column.
White Space. White space visually frames information and breaks it
into manageable chunks. For example, white space between paragraphs
helps readers see the information in each paragraph as a unit. White
space between sections can also serve as a visual cue to signal that one
section is ending and another is beginning.
Color. Color and screening (shaded areas on a page) can distinguish
L
one part of a document from another or unify a series of documents.
They can set off sections within a document, highlight examples, or em-
phasize warnings. In tables, screening can highlight column titles or sets
of data to which you want to draw the reader’s attention.
Visuals
Readers notice visuals before they notice text, and they notice larger vi-
suals before they notice smaller ones. Thus, the size of an illustration
suggests its relative importance. For newsletter articles and publications
aimed at wide audiences, consider especially the proportion of the vi-
sual to the text. Magazine designers often use the three-fifths rule: Page
layout is more dramatic and appealing when the major element
(photograph, drawing, or other visual) occupies three-fifths rather than
one-half the available space. The same principle can be used to enhance
the visual appeal of a report.
Visuals can be gathered in one place (for example, at the end of a re-
port), but placing them in the text closer to their accompanying explana-
tions makes them more effective. Using illustrations in the text also
provides visual relief. For advice on the placement of visuals, see the
Writer’s Checklist: Creating and Integrating Visuals(pages 556–57).
Icons. Icons are pictorial representations used to describe such con-
cepts as computer files, programs, or commands. Commonly used icons

=== Page 333 ===
6860ch0L.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 300
300 lend / loan
on the Web include the national flags to symbolize different language
versions of a document. To be effective, icons must be simple and easily
recognized or defined as well as culturally appropriate. See also global
graphics.
Captions. Captions are titles that highlight or describe visuals, such as
photographs. Captions often appear below or above figures and tables
and are aligned with the visual to the left or are centered.
Rules. Rules are vertical or horizontal lines used to box or divide one
area of the page from another. Rules and boxes, for example, set off vi-
suals from surrounding explanations or highlight warning statements
from the steps in instructions.
Page Layoutand Thumbnails
Page layout involves combining typography, design elements, and visu-
als on a page to make a coherent whole. The flexibility of your design is
affected by your design software, your method of printing the docu-
ment, your budget, and whether your employer or client requires you to
use a template.
Before you spend time positioning actual text and visuals on a
L
page, especially for documents such as brochures, you may want to cre-
ate a thumbnail sketch, in which blocks of simulated text and visuals
indicate the placement of elements. You can go further by roughly as-
sembling all the thumbnail pages to show the size, shape, form, and
general style of a large document. Such a mock-up, called a dummy, al-
lows you to see how a finished document will look.
WEB LINK Designing Documents
Word-processing and desktop-publishing programs offer many op-
tions for improving the layout-and-design elements of your document.
For a tutorial on these options,see bedfordstmartins.com/alredtech
and selectTutorials,“Designing Documents with a Word Processor.”For
step-by-step instructions for setting margins,alignment,columns,and
other design elements,selectDigital Tips,“Laying Outa Page”and “Cre-
ating Styles and Templates.”
lend / loan
Both lend and loan can be used as verbs, but lend is more common.
(“You can lend [or loan] them the money if you wish.”) Unlike lend,
loancan be a noun. (“The bank approved our loan.”)

=== Page 334 ===
6860ch0L.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 301
letters 301
letters
Business letters—normally written for those outside an organization—
are often the most appropriate choice for formal communications with
professional associates or customers. Letters printed on organizational
letterhead communicate formality, respect, and authority. See corre-
spondence for advice on writing strategy and style. See also selecting
the medium.
Although word-processing software includes templates for format-
ting business letters, the templates may not provide the appropriate di-
mensions and spacing you need. The following sections offer specific
advice on formatting and etiquette for business letters.*
Common Letter Styles
If your employer requires a particular format, use it. Otherwise, follow
the guidelines provided here, and review the examples shown in Figures
L–4 and L–5.
The two most common formats for business letters are the full-
block style shown in Figure L–4 and the modified-block style shown in
Figure L–5. In the full-block style, the entire letter is aligned at the left
L
margin. In the modified-block style, the return address, date, and com-
plimentary closing begin at the center of the page and the other ele-
ments are aligned at the left margin. All other letter styles are variations
of the full-block and modified-block styles.
To achieve a professional appearance, center the letter on the page
vertically and horizontally. Although one-inch margins are the default
standard in many word-processing programs, it is more important to
establish a picture frame of blank space surrounding the page of text.
When you use organizational letterhead stationery, consider the bottom
of the letterhead as the top edge of the paper. The right margin should
be approximately as wide as the left margin. To give a fuller appearance
to very short letters, increase both margins to about an inch and a half.
Use your full-page or print-preview feature to check for proportion.
Heading
Unless you are using letterhead stationery, place your full return address
and the date in the heading. Because your name appears at the end of
the letter, it need not be included in the heading. Spell out words such
as street, avenue, first, and west rather than abbreviating them. You
may either spell out the name of the state in full or use the standard
Postal Service abbreviation available at usps.com. The date usually goes
*For additional details on letter formats and design, you may wish to consult a guide
such as The Gregg Reference Manual (Tenth Edition) by William A. Sabin (New
York: McGaw-Hill, 2004).

=== Page 335 ===
6860ch0L.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 302
302 letters
520 Niagara Street EEVVAANNSS
Braintree, MA 02184 aanndd AAssssoocciiaatteess
Letterhead
Phone:(781) 787-1175
Fax:(781) 787-1213
E-mail:info@evans.com TTrraannssppoorrttaattiioonn EEnnggiinneeeerrss
Date May 15, 2009
Inside Mr. George W. Nagel
address Director of Operations
Boston Transit Authority
57 West City Avenue
Boston, MA 02210
Salutation Dear Mr. Nagel:
L Enclosed is our final report evaluating the safety measures for
the Boston Intercity Transit System.
We believe that the report covers the issues you raised in our last
Body meeting and that you will be pleased with the results. However, if
you have any further questions, we would be happy to meet with
you again at your convenience.
We would also like to express our appreciation to Mr. L. K.
Sullivan of your committee for his generous help during our
trips to Boston.
Compli-
mentary Sincerely,
closing
Carolyn Brown
Signature
Writer’s Carolyn Brown, Ph.D.
signature Director of Research
block cbrown@evans.com
End CB/ls
notations Enclosure: Final Safety Report
cc: ITS Safety Committee Members
FIGUREL–4. Full-Block-Style Letter (with Letterhead)

=== Page 336 ===
6860ch0L.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 303
letters 303
Center
Heading 3814 Oak Lane
from center Dedham, MA 02180
to right December 8, 2009
Inside Dr. Carolyn Brown
address Director of Research
Evans and Associates
Transportation Engineers
520 Niagara Street
Braintree, MA 02184
Salutation Dear Dr. Brown:
Thank you very much for allowing me to tour your testing
L
facilities. The information I gained from the tour will be of
Body great help to me in preparing the report for my class at Marshall
Institute. The tour has also given me some insight into the work
I may eventually do as a laboratory technician.
I especially appreciated the time and effort Vikram Singh spent
in showing me your facilities. His comments and advice were most
helpful.
Again, thank you.
Complimentary
Sincerely, closing aligned
with heading
Leslie Warden
Signature
Writer’s Leslie Warden
signature 781-555-1212
block
Center
FIGUREL–5. Modified-Block-Style Letter (WithoutLetterhead)

=== Page 337 ===
6860ch0L.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 304
304 letters
directly beneath the last line of the return address. Do not abbreviate the
name of the month. Begin the heading about two inches from the top of
the page. If you are using letterhead that gives the company address,
enter only the date, three lines below the last line of the letterhead.
Inside Address
Include the recipient’s full name, title, and address in the inside address,
two to six lines below the date, depending on the length of the letter.
The inside address should be aligned with the left margin, and the left
margin should be at least one inch wide.
Salutation
Place the salutation, or greeting, two lines below the inside address and
align it with the left margin. In most business letters, the salutation con-
tains the recipient’s personal title (such as Mr., Ms., Dr.) and last name,
followed by a colon. If you are on a first-name basis with the recipient,
use only the first name in the salutation.
Address women as Ms. unless they have expressed a preference for
Miss or Mrs. However, professional titles (such as Professor, Senator,
L
Major) take precedence over Ms. and similar courtesy titles.
When a person’s first name could be either feminine or masculine,
one solution is to use both the first and last names in the salutation
(Dear Pat Smith:). Avoid “To Whom It May Concern” because it is im-
personal and dated.
For multiple recipients, the following salutations are appropriate:
(cid:2) Dear Professor Allen and Dr. Rivera: [two recipients]
(cid:2) Dear Ms. Becham, Ms. Moore, and Mr. Stein: [three recipients]
(cid:2) Dear Colleagues: [Members, or other suitable collective term]
If you are writing to a large company and do not know the name or
title of the recipient, you may address a letter to an appropriate depart-
ment or identify the subject in a subject line and use no salutation. (For
information on creating subject lines, see page 110 of correspondence.)
(cid:2) National Medical Supply Group
501 West National Avenue
Minneapolis, MN 55407
Attention: Customer Service Department
or
Subject: Defective Cardio-100 Stethoscopes
I am returning six stethoscopes with damaged diaphragms that...

=== Page 338 ===
6860ch0L.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 305
letters 305
In other circumstances in which you do not know the recipient’s name,
use a title appropriate to the context of the letter, such as Dear Cus-
tomeror Dear IT Professional.
Body
The body of the letter should begin two lines below the salutation (or
any element that precedes the body, such as a subject or an attention
line). Single-space within and double-space between paragraphs, as
shown in Figures L–4 and L–5. To provide a fuller appearance to a very
short letter, you can increase the side margins or increase the font size.
You can also insert extra space above the inside address, the typed (sig-
nature) name, and the initials of the person typing the letter—but do
not exceed twice the recommended space for each of these elements.
Complimentary Closing
Type the complimentary closing two spaces below the body. Use a stan-
dard expression such as Sincerely, Sincerely yours, or Yours truly. (If
the recipient is a friend as well as a business associate, you can use a
less formal closing, such as Best wishesor Best regardsor, simply, Best.)
Capitalize only the initial letter of the first word, and follow the expres- L
sion with a comma.
Writer’s Signature Block
Type your full name four lines below and aligned with the complimen-
tary closing. On the next line include your business title, if appropriate.
The following lines may contain your individual contact information,
such as a telephone number or an e-mailaddress, if not included in the
letterhead or the body of your letter. Sign the letter in the space between
the complimentary closing and your name.
End Notations
Business letters sometimes require additional information that is placed
at the left margin, two spaces below the typed name and title of the
writer in a long letter, four spaces below in a short letter.
Reference initials show the letter writer’s initials in capital letters,
followed by a slash mark (or colon), and then the initials of the person
typing the letter in lowercase letters, as shown in Figure L–4. When the
writer is also the person typing the letter, no initials are needed.
Enclosure notations indicate that the writer is sending material
along with the letter (an invoice, an article, and so on). Note that you
should mention the enclosure in the body of the letter. Enclosure nota-
tions may take several forms:

=== Page 339 ===
6860ch0L.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 306
306 like / as
(cid:2) Enclosure: Final Safety Report
(cid:2) Enclosures (2)
(cid:2) Enc. orEncs.
Copy notation (“cc:”) tells the reader that a copy of the letter is
being sent to the named recipient(s) (see Figure L–4). Use a blind-copy
notation (“bcc:”) when you do not want the addressee to know that a
copy is being sent to someone else. A blind-copy notation appears only
on the copy, not on the original (“bcc: Dr. Brenda Shelton”).
Continuing Pages
If a letter requires a second page (or, in rare cases, more), always carry
at least two lines of the body text over to that page. Use plain (nonlet-
terhead) paper of quality equivalent to that of the letterhead stationery
for the second page. It should have a header with the recipient’s name,
the page number, and the date. Place the header in the upper left-hand
corner or across the page, as shown in Figure L–6.
L
Ms. M. C. Marks
Page 2
March 16, 2009
Ms. M. C. Marks 2 March 16, 2009
FIGURE L–6. Headers for the Second Page of a Letter
like / as
To avoid confusion between likeand as, remember that likeis a prepo-
sitionand as(or as if)is a conjunction. Use likewith a nounor pronoun
that is not followed by a verb.
(cid:2) The supervisor still behaves likea novice.

=== Page 340 ===
6860ch0L.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 307
listening 307
Use asbefore clauses, which contain verbs.
(cid:2) He responded aswe expected he would.
(cid:2) The presentation seemed as ifit would never end.
Like and as are used in comparisons: Like is used in constructions that
omit the verb, and asis used when the verb is retained.
(cid:2) He adapted to the new system likea duck to water.
(cid:2) He adapted to the new system asa duck adapts to water.
listening
Effective listening enables the listener to understand the directions of an
instructor, the message in a speaker’s presentation, the goals of a man-
ager, and the needs and wants of customers. Above all, it lays the foun-
dation for cooperation. Productive communication occurs when both
the speaker and the listener focus clearly on the content of the message
L
and attempt to eliminate as much interference as possible.
Fallacies AboutListening
Most people assume that because they can hear, they know how to lis-
ten. In fact, hearing is passive, whereas listening is active. Hearing
voices in a crowd or a ringing telephone requires no analysis and no
active involvement. We hear such sounds without choosing to listen
to them—we have no choice but to hear them. Listening, however,
requires actively focusing on a speaker, interpreting the message, and
assessing its worth. Listening also requires that you consider the con-
text of messages and the differences in meaning that may be the result
of differences in the speaker’s and the listener’s occupation, education,
culture, sex, race, or other factors. See also biased language, conno-
tation / denotation, English as a second language, and global commu-
nication.
Active Listening
To become an active listener, you need to take the following steps:
Step 1:Make a Conscious Decision. The first step to active listening is
simply making up your mind to do so. Active listening requires a con-
scious effort, something that does not come naturally. The well-known

=== Page 341 ===
6860ch0L.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 308
308 listening
precept offers good advice: “Seek first to understand and thento be un-
derstood.”*
Step 2:Define Your Purpose. Knowing why you are listening can go a
long way toward managing the most common listening problems: drift-
ing attention, formulating your response while the speaker is still talk-
ing, and interrupting the speaker. To help you define your purpose for
listening, ask yourself these questions:
• What kind of information do I hope to get from this exchange, and
how will I use it?
• What kind of message do I want to send while I am listening? (Do
I want to portray understanding, determination, flexibility, compe-
tence, or patience?)
• What factors—boredom, daydreaming, anger, impatience—might
interfere with listening during the interaction? How can I keep
these factors from placing a barrier between the speaker and me?
Step 3:Take Specific Actions. Becoming an active listener requires a
willingness to become a responder rather than a reactor. A responderis
L a listener who slows down the communication to be certain that he or
she is accurately receiving the message sent by the speaker. A reactor
simply says the first thing that comes to mind, without checking to
make sure that he or she accurately understands the message. Take the
following actions to help you become a responder and not a reactor.
• Make a conscious effort to be impartial when evaluating a mes-
sage. For example, do not dismiss a message because you dislike
the speaker or are distracted by the speaker’s appearance, manner-
isms, or accent.
• Slow down the communication by asking for more information
or by paraphrasingthe message received before you offer your
thoughts. Paraphrasing lets the speaker know you are listening,
gives the speaker an opportunity to clear up any misunderstanding,
and keeps you focused.
• Listen with empathy by putting yourself in the speaker’s position.
When people feel they are being listened to empathetically, they
tend to respond with appreciation and cooperation, thereby im-
proving the communication.
• Take notes, when possible, to help you stay focused on what a
speaker is saying. Note-takingnot only communicates your atten-
*Stephen R. Covey, The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People: Powerful Lessons in
Personal Change, 15th ed. (New York: Free Press, 2004).

=== Page 342 ===
6860ch0L.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 309
lists 309
tiveness to the speaker but also reinforces the message and helps
you remember it.
Step 4: Adapt to the Situation. The requirements of active listening
differ from one situation to another. For example, when you are listen-
ing to a lecture, you may be listening only for specific information.
However, if you are on a team project that depends on everyone’s con-
tribution, you need to listen at the highest level so that you can gather
information as well as pick up on nuances the other speakers may be
communicating. See also collaborative writing.
lists
Vertically stacked lists of words, phrases, and other items that are often
highlighted with bullets, numbers, or letters can save readers time by al-
lowing them to see at a glance specific items or key points. As shown in
Figure L–7, lists also help readers by breaking up complex statements
and by focusing on such information as steps in sequence, materials or
parts needed, questions or concluding points, and recommendations.
As Figure L–7 also shows, you should provide contextby introduc- L
ing a list, preferably with a complete sentence followed by a colon or
without punctuation if the introductory statement is a fragment. Ensure
coherence by following the list with some reference to the list or the
statement that introduced the list.
Before we agree to hold the software engineering conference at the
Brent Hotel, we need to make sure the hotel can provide the follow-
ing resources:
• Business center with high-quality Internet access and printing
services
• Main exhibit area that can accommodate thirty 8-foot-by-
15-foot booths
• Eight meeting rooms, each with a podium or table and seating
for 25 people
• High-speed Internet access and digital projection in each room
• Ballroom dining facilities for 250 people with a dais for four
speakers
To confirm that the Brent Hotel is our best choice, we should tour
the facilities during our stay in Kansas City.
FIGUREL–7. Bulleted Listin a Paragraph

=== Page 343 ===
6860ch0L.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 310
310 literature reviews
WRITER’S CHECKLIST Using Lists
Follow the practices of your organization or use the guidelines below for
consistency and formatting.
CONSISTENCY
(cid:3)
Do notoveruse lists or include too many items,as in full pages of lists
or presentationslides thatare dense with lists.
(cid:3)
Listonly comparable items,such as tasks or equipment,thatare
balanced in importance (as in Figure L–7).
(cid:3)
Begin each listed item in the same way—whether with nouns,verbs,
or other parts of speech—and maintain parallel structurethrough-
out.
FORMATTING
(cid:3)
Capitalize the firstword in each listed item,unless doing so is visually
awkward.
(cid:3)
Use periodsor other ending punctuationwhen the listed items are
complete sentences.
(cid:3)
Avoid commasor semicolonsfollowing items and do notuse the
L
conjunctionandbefore the lastitem in a list.
(cid:3)
Use bullets (round,square,arrow) when you do notwish to indicate
rank or sequence.
(cid:3)
Listbulleted items in a logical order,keeping your audienceand
purposein mind.See also methods of developmentand persuasion.
(cid:3)
Use numbers to indicate sequence or rank.
(cid:3)
Follow each number with a period and startthe item with a capital
letter.
(cid:3)
When lists need subdivisions,use letters with numbers.See also
outlining.
literature reviews
A literature review is a summary of the relevant literature (printed and
electronic) available on a particular subject over a specified period of
time. For example, a literature review might describe significant mate-
rial published in the past five years on a technique for improving emer-
gency medical diagnostic procedures, or it might describe all reports
written in the past ten years on efforts to improve safety procedures at a
particular company. A literature review tells readers what has been pub-

=== Page 344 ===
6860ch0L.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 311
literature reviews 311
lished on a particular subject and gives them an idea of what material
they should read in full.
Some trade journal articlesor theses begin with a brief literature re-
view to bring the reader up to date on current research in the field. The
writer then uses the review as background for his or her own discussion
of the subject. Figure L–8 shows a literature review that serves as an in-
troduction for an article that surveys the use of visual communication
in the workplace. A literature review also could be a whole document in
itself. Fully developed literature reviews are good starting points for de-
tailed research.
To prepare a literature review, you must first research published
material on your topic. Because your readers may begin their research
based on your literature review, carefully and accurately cite all biblio-
graphic information. As you review each source, note the scope of the
Our field’s growing awareness of the centrality of visual communi-
cation to the work of professional writers has given rise to much
of the visually oriented research in pedagogy, rhetoric, and related
areas within professional communication (see, for example, L
Brasseur, 1997; Kostelnick, 1994). Complementing this work, edu-
cators have also been actively developing courses and programs to
help prepare students for the expanded professional roles they will
likely assume. It is not surprising, therefore, that a 2003 survey of
members of the Association of Teachers of Technical Writing
(ATTW) ascertained that teachers of professional writing give
visual communication top billing as a topic of interest (Dayton &
Bernhardt, 2004). However, while visual communication has estab-
lished a firm foothold in professional communication research and
pedagogy (Allen & Benninghoff, 2004), program coordinators and
faculty more generally lack current data about the role of visual
communication in the workplace. Such data could help to deter-
mine whether academic perceptions of the importance of visual
communication are well founded, and, in turn, whether academic
programs are meeting student needs in terms of workplace prepara-
tion. Such data could also provide concrete evidence in arguments
about curricular design and enrich the information educators are
able to offer students about the workplace life of the professional
writer. As professional communication programs continue to
mature and proliferate, such information will become even more
useful.
Source: Brumberger, Eva. “Visual Communication in the Work-
place: A Survey of Practice.” Technical Communication Quarterly
16, no. 4 (Autumn 2007): 369–95.
FIGURE L–8. Literature Review

=== Page 345 ===
6860ch0L.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 312
312 logic errors
book or article and judge its value to the reader. Save all printouts of
computer-assisted searches—you may want to incorporate the sources
in a bibliography. See also documenting sources.
Begin a literature review by defining the area to be covered and the
types of works to be reviewed. For example, a literature review may be
limited to articles and reports and not include any books. You can
arrange your discussion chronologically, beginning with a description
of the earliest relevant literature and progressing to the most recent (or
vice versa). You can also subdivide the topic, discussing works in vari-
ous subcategories of the topic.
Related to literature reviews are annotated bibliographies, which
also give readers information about published material. Unlike litera-
ture reviews, however, an annotated bibliography cites each biblio-
graphic item and then describes it in a single block of text. The descrip-
tion (or annotation) may include the purpose of the article or book, its
scope, the main topics covered, its historical importance, and anything
else the writer feels the reader should know.
logic errors
L
Logic is essential to convincing an audience that your conclusions are
valid. Errors in logic can undermine the point you are trying to commu-
nicate and your credibility. Some typical logic errors are described in
this entry. See also persuasion.
ETHICS NOTE Many of the following errors in logic, when used to mis-
lead readers, are unethical as well as illogical. See also ethics in writing. ✦
Lack of Reason
When a statement is contrary to the reader’s common sense, that state-
ment is not reasonable. If, for example, you stated, “New York is a
small town,” your reader might immediately question your statement.
However, if you stated, “Although New York’s population is over eight
million, it is composed of neighborhoods that function as small towns,”
your reader could probably accept the statement as reasonable.
Sweeping Generalizations
Sweeping generalizations are statements that are too broad or all-
inclusive to be supportable; they generally enlarge an observation about
a small group to refer to an entire population. A flat statement such as
“Management is never concerned about employees” ignores any evi-
dence that management could be concerned for its employees. Using
such generalizations weakens your credibility.

=== Page 346 ===
6860ch0L.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 313
logic errors 313
Non Sequiturs
A non sequitur is a statement that does not logically follow a previous
statement.
(cid:2) I cleared off my desk, and the report is due today.
The missing link in these statements is that the writer cleared his or her
desk to make space for materials to help finish the report that is due
today. In your own writing, be careful that you do not allow gaps in
logic to produce non sequiturs.
False Cause
A false cause (also called post hoc, ergo propter hoc) refers to the logi-
cal fallacy that because one event followed another event, the first
somehow caused the second.
(cid:2) I didn’t bring my umbrella today. No wonder it is now raining.
(cid:2) Because we now have our board meetings at the Education Center,
our management turnover rate has declined.
L
Such errors in reasoning can happen when the writer hastily concludes
that two events are related without examining whether a causal connec-
tion between them, in fact, exists.
Biased or Suppressed Evidence
A conclusion reached as a result of biased or suppressed evidence—
self-serving data, questionable sources, purposely omitted or incom-
plete facts—is both illogical and unethical. Suppose you are preparing
a report on the acceptance of a new policy among employees. If you
distribute questionnairesonly to those who think the policy is effective,
the resulting evidence will be biased. Intentionally ignoring relevant
data that might not support your position not only produces inaccurate
results but also is unethical.
FactVersus Opinion
Distinguish between fact and opinion. Facts include verifiable data or
statements, whereas opinions are personal conclusions that may or may
not be based on facts. For example, it is verifiable that distilled water
boils at 100°C; that it tastes better or worse than tap water is an opin-
ion. Distinguish the facts from your opinions in your writing so that
your readers can draw their own conclusions.

=== Page 347 ===
6860ch0L.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 314
314 loose / lose
Loaded Arguments
When you include an opinion in a statement and then reach conclusions
that are based on that statement, you are loading the argument. Con-
sider the following opening for a memo:
(cid:2) I have several suggestions to improve the poorly written policy
manual. First, we should change...
Unless everyone agrees that the manual is poorly written, readers may
reject a writer’s entire message because they disagree with this loaded
premise. Do not load arguments in your writing; conclusions reached
with loaded statements are weak and can produce negative reactions in
readers who detect the loading.
WEB LINK Understanding an Argument
Dr.Frank Edler of Metropolitan Community College in Omaha,Ne-
braska,offers a tutorial in recognizing the logical components of an
argumentand thinking critically.See bedfordstmartins.com/alredtech
and selectLinks for Handbook Entries.
L
loose / lose
Loose is an adjective meaning “not fastened” or “unrestrained.” (“He
found a loosewire.”) Loseis a verbmeaning “be deprived of” or “fail to
win.” (“I hope we do not losethe contract.”)

=== Page 348 ===
6860ch0M.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 315
M
malapropisms
A malapropism is a word that sounds similar to the one intended but is
ludicrously wrong in the context.
INCORRECT Our employees are less sedimentarynow that we have
a fitness center.
CORRECT Our employees are less sedentarynow that we have a
fitness center.
Intentional malapropisms are sometimes used in humorous writing; un-
intentional malapropisms can confuse readers and embarrass a writer.
See also figures of speech.
M
manuals
Manuals (printed or electronic) help customers and technical specialists
use and maintain products. These manuals are often written by profes-
sional technical writers, although in smaller companies, engineers or
technicians may write them. See also instructionsand review the entries
process explanationand technical writing style.
Types of Manuals
User Manuals. User manuals are aimed at skilled or unskilled users of
equipment and provide instructions for the setup, operation, and main-
tenance of a product. User manuals also typically include safety precau-
tions and troubleshooting charts and guides.
Tutorials. Tutorials are self-study guides for users of a product or sys-
tem. Either packaged with user manuals or provided electronically, tu-
torials guide novice users through the operation of a product or system.
Training Manuals. Training manuals are used to prepare individuals
for some procedure or skill, such as operating a respirator, flying an
315

=== Page 349 ===
6860ch0M.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 316
316 manuals
airplane, or processing an insurance claim. Training manuals may be
printed or delivered in electronic or online forms.
Operators’ Manuals. Written for skilled operators of construction,
manufacturing, computer, or military equipment, operators’ manuals
contain essential instructions and safety warnings. They are often pub-
lished in a convenient format that allows operators to use them at a
work site.
Service Manuals. Service manuals help trained technicians repair
equipment or systems, usually at the customer’s location. Such manuals
often contain troubleshooting guides for locating technical problems.
Special-Purpose Manuals. Some users need manuals that fulfill special
purposes; these include programmer reference manuals, overhaul man-
uals, handling and setup manuals, and safety manuals.
Designing and Writing Effective Manuals
Identify and Write for Your Audience. Will you be writing for novice
users, intermediate users, or experts? Or will you be instructing a com-
bination of users with different levels of technical knowledge and expe-
rience? Identify your audience before you begin writing. Depending on
M
your audience, you will make the following decisions:
• Which details to include (fewer for experts, more for novices)
• What level of technical vocabulary to use (necessary technical
terminology for experts, plain language for novices)
• Whether to include a summary list of steps (experts will probably
prefer using this summary list and not the entire manual; once
novices and intermediate users gain more skill, they will also prefer
referring just to this summary list)
Design your manual so that readerscan use the equipment, software, or
machinery while they are also reading your instructions. See also layout
and design.
• Provide headingsand subheadings using words that readers will
find familiar so that they can easily locate particular sections and
instructions.
• Write with precision and accuracy so that readers can perform the
procedures easily.
• Use clearly drawn and labeled visuals, in addition to written text,
to show readers exactly what equipment, online screens, or other
items in front of them should look like.

=== Page 350 ===
6860ch0M.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 317
manuals 317
Provide an Overview. An overview at the beginning of a manual
should explain the overall purpose of the procedure, how the procedure
can be useful to the reader, and any cautions or warnings the reader
should know about before starting. If readers know the purpose of the
procedure and its specific workplace applications, they will be more
likely to pay close attention to the steps of the procedure and apply
them appropriately in the future.
Create Major Sections. Divide any procedure into separate goals, cre-
ate major sections to cover those goals, and state them in the section
headings. If your manual has chapters, you can divide each chapter into
specific subsections. In a manual for students about designing a Web
page, an introductory chapter might include these subsections: (1) ob-
taining Web space, (2) viewing the new space, (3) using a Web author-
ing tool.
Use Headings to Indicate the Goals of Actions. Within each section,
you can use headings to describe why readers need to follow each step
or each related set of steps. The conventional way to indicate a goal in a
heading is to use the infinitive form of a verb(“To scanthe document”)
or the gerund form (“Scanning the document”). Whichever verb form
you choose for headings, use it consistently throughout your manual
each time you want to indicate a goal. The following example shows M
how a heading can indicate the goal of a set of actions with the gerund
form of the verb (“Scanning”).
(cid:2) Scanning Documents
Action 1 Place the document in the feeder
Action 2 Check the box below the window for single-page items
Action 3 Click “SCAN” to open the “Scan Manager”
Use the Imperative Verb Form to Indicate Actions. The previous ex-
ample shows the conventional way to indicate an action by using the
imperative form of verbs (“Place the document”; “Check the box”).
Use the imperative form consistently each time you want to indicate an
action. In the example about scanning documents, the manual writer
designated actions by placing subheads (Action 1, Action 2, and so on)
in the left margin and imperative verbs (“Place,” “Check,” and “Click”)
in the instructions to the right of the subheads.
Use Simple and DirectVerbs. Simple and direct verbs are most mean-
ingful, especially for novice readers. Avoid jargon and terms known
only to intermediate readers or experts, unless you know that they con-
stitute the entire reading audience.

=== Page 351 ===
6860ch0M.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 318
318 manuals
POOR VERB CHOICE BETTER VERB CHOICE
Attempt Try
Depress,Hit Press
Discontinue Stop
Display Show
Employ Use
Enumerate Count
Execute Do
Observe Watch
Segregate Divide
Indicate the Response of Actions. When appropriate, indicate the ex-
pected response of an action to reassure readers that they are perform-
ing the procedure correctly (for example, “A blinking light will appear”
or “You will see a red triangle”). Use the form you choose consistently
throughout a set of instructions to designate a response. In the follow-
ing example, you can see how the response is indented farther to the
right than the action, begins with a subhead (“Response”), and is indi-
cated by a full sentence.
(cid:2) Action 3 Click “SCAN” to open the “Scan Manager”
Response The “Scan Manager” will open and ask you to
M choose “preview,” “scan,” or “help.”
Checking for Usability. To test the accuracy and clarityof your instruc-
tions, at a minimum ask someone who is not familiar with the subject to
use the manual to spot missing steps or confusing passages. In most cases,
you should conduct systematic usability testingon manual drafts so that
you can detect errors and other problems readers might encounter.
WRITER’S CHECKLIST Preparing Manuals
(cid:3)
Determine the bestmedium for your manual:Web,online document,
CD-ROM,spiral binding,loose-leaf binding,and so on.
(cid:3)
Pay attention to organizationand outliningbecause complex products
and systems need well-organized manuals to be useful to readers.
(cid:3)
Use a consistentformatfor each partof a manual:headings,sub-
headings,goals,actions,responses,cautions,warnings,and tips.
(cid:3)
Use standardized symbols,as described in global graphics,especially
for international readers or where regulations require them.
(cid:3)
Use visuals—such as screen shots,schematics,exploded-view
drawings,flowcharts,photographs,and tables—placing them where
they would mostbenefitreaders.
(cid:3)
Include indexesto help readers find information.

=== Page 352 ===
6860ch0M.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 319
maps 319
Writer’s Checklist:Preparing Manuals (continued)
(cid:3)
Use warning statements and standard symbols for potential dangers,
as described on pages 260–61.
(cid:3)
Have manuals reviewed by your peers as well as by technical experts
and other specialists to ensure thatthe manuals are helpful,accu-
rate,and appropriate.See also revisionand proofreading.
maps
Maps are often used to show specific geographic areas and features
(roads, mountains, rivers, and the like). They can also illustrate geo-
graphic distributions of populations, climate patterns, corporate branch
offices, and so forth. The map in Figure M–1, from an environmental
assessment, shows the overlapping geographic areas served by three
electric utilities in Missouri, Iowa, and Illinois. Note that the map con-
tains a figure number and title, scale of distances, key (or legend), com-
pass, and distinctive highlighting for emphasis. Maps are often used in
reports, proposals, brochures, environmental impact statements, and
other documents in which readers need to know the location or geo-
M
graphic orientation of buildings and other facilities.
WRITER’S CHECKLIST Creating and Using Maps
(cid:3)
Follow the general guidelines discussed in visualsfor placementof
maps.
(cid:3)
Label each map clearly,and assign each map a figure number if itis
one of a number of illustrations.
(cid:3)
Clearly identify all boundaries in the map.Eliminate unnecessary
boundaries.
(cid:3)
Eliminate unnecessary information thatmay clutter a map.For ex-
ample,if the purpose of the map is to show population centers,do
notinclude mountain elevations,rivers,or other physical features.
(cid:3)
Include a scale of miles/kilometers or feet/meters to give your readers
an indication of the map’s proportions.
(cid:3)
Indicate which direction is north with an arrow or a compass symbol.
(cid:3)
Emphasize key features by using color,shading,dots,crosshatching,
or other appropriate symbols.
(cid:3)
Include a key,or legend,thatexplains whatthe differentcolors,
shadings,or symbols represent.

=== Page 353 ===
6860ch0M.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 320
320 mathematical equations
M
Source: The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission
FIGURE M–1. Map
WEB LINK Maps and Mapping Information
The University of Texas Libraries offer a useful site with links to online
maps and other types of mapping and cartographic resources.See
bedfordstmartins.com/alredtechand selectLinks for Handbook Entries.
mathematical equations
You can accurately prepare material with mathematical equations and
make it easy to read by following consistent standards throughout a
document. Mathematicians often use scientific software packages to

=== Page 354 ===
6860ch0M.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 321
mathematical equations 321
prepare and format research articles and reports with mathematical
equations. Some scientific journals, in fact, require documents to be
written with software packages such as LaTeX, Scientific Workplace,
AMSTeX, or similar versions of TeX (www.latex-project.org/). Unless
you need to follow such specific styles or specifications, the guidelines
in this entry should serve you well.
Formatting Equations
Set short and simple equations, such as x(y) = y2+ 3y+ 2, as part of the
running text rather than displaying them on separate lines, as long as an
equation does not appear at the beginning of a sentence. If a document
contains multiple equations, identify them with numbers, as the follow-
ing example shows:
x(y) = y2+ 3y+ 2 (1)
Number displayed equations consecutively throughout the work. Place
the equation number, in parentheses, at the right margin of the same
line as the equation (or of the first line if the equation runs longer than
one line). Leave at least four spaces between the equation and the equa-
tion number. Refer to displayed equations by number, for example, as
“Equation 1” or “Eq. 1.”
M
Positioning Displayed Equations
Equations that are set off from the text need to be surrounded by space.
Triple-space between displayed equations and normal text. Double-
space between one equation and another and between the lines of multi-
line equations. Count space above the equation from the uppermost
character in the equation; count space below from the lowermost char-
acter.
Type displayed equations either at the left margin or indented five
spaces from the left margin, depending on their length. When a series of
short equations is displayed in sequence, align them on the equal signs.
p(x,y) =sin(x+ y) (2)
p(x,y) =sinxcosy+ cosxsiny (3)
p(x , y ) =sinx cosy + cosx siny (4)
0 0 0 0 0 0
q(x,y) =cos(x+ y) (5)
=cosxcosy−sinxsiny
q(x , y ) =cosx cosy −sinx siny (6)
0 0 0 0 0 0
Break an equation that requires two lines at the equal sign, carrying the
equal sign over to the second portion of the equation.

=== Page 355 ===
6860ch0M.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 322
322 maybe / may be
(cid:2)1(f − -nf )2r dr+ 2n (cid:2)1f f dr (7)
0 n r n 0 n n
= (cid:2)1(f − -nf )2r dr + nf2(1)
0 n r n n
If you cannot break an equation at the equal sign, break it at a plus or
minus sign that is not in parentheses or brackets. Bring the plus or
minus sign to the next line of the equation, which should be positioned
to end near the right margin of the equation.
ø(x, y, z) =(x2+ y2+ z2)1/2(x−y+ z) (x+ y−z)2 (8)
−[f(x, y, z) −3x2]
The next best place to break an equation is between parentheses or
brackets that indicate multiplication of two major elements.
For equations that require more than two lines, start the first line at
the left margin, end the last line at the right margin (or four spaces to
the left of the equation’s number), and center intermediate lines be-
tween the margins. Whenever possible, break equations at operational
signs, parentheses, or brackets.
Omit punctuation after displayed equations, even when they end a
sentence and even when a key list defining terms follows (for example,
P= pressure, psf; V= volume, cu ft; T= temperature, ºC). Punctuation
may be used before an equation, however, depending on the grammati-
cal construction.
M
The term (n) may be written in a more familiar way by using the
r
following algebraic device:
(n)(n−1)(n−2)...(n– r+ 1)(n−r)(n−r−1)...3·2·1 (9)
(n) =
r (n−r)(n−r−1)...3·2·1
= n!
(n−r)!
maybe / may be
Maybe (one word) is an adverb meaning “perhaps.” (“Maybe the legal
staff can resolve this issue.”) May be (two words) is a verb phrase. (“It
may benecessary to hire a specialist.”)
media / medium
Mediais the plural of mediumand should always be used with a plural
verb.

=== Page 356 ===
6860ch0M.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 323
meetings 323
(cid:2) Many communication media areavailable today.
(cid:2) The Internet isa multifaceted medium.
meetings
Meetings allow people to share information and collaborate to produce
better results than exchanges of e-mail messages or other means would
allow. Like a presentation, a successful meeting requires planning and
preparation. See also selectingthe medium.
Planning a Meeting
As you plan a meeting, determine the focus of the meeting, decide who
should attend, and choose the best time and place to hold it. Prepare an
agenda for the meeting and determine who should take the minutes. See
minutes of meetings.
Determine the Purpose of the Meeting. The first step in planning a
meeting is to focus on the desired outcome. Ask yourself the following
question to help you determine the purpose of the meeting: What
should participants know, believe, do, or be able to do as a result of at- M
tending the meeting?
Once you have your desired outcome in focus, use the information
to write a purpose statement for the meeting that answers the questions
whatand why.
(cid:2) The purpose of this meeting is to gather ideas from the sales force
[what] in order to create a successful sales campaign for our new
scanner [why].
Decide Who Should Attend. Schedule a meeting for a time when all or
most of the key people can be present. If a meeting must be held with-
out some key participants, ask those people for their contributions
prior to the meeting or invite them to participate by speakerphone,
videoconference, or such remote methods as described in Digital Tip:
Conducting Meetings from Remote Locations. Of course, the meeting
minutes should be distributed to everyone, including significant non-
attendees.
Choose the Meeting Time. The time of day and the length of the meet-
ing can influence its outcome. Consider the following when you are
planning a meeting:

=== Page 357 ===
6860ch0M.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 324
324 meetings
• Monday morning is often used to prepare for the coming week’s
work.
• Friday afternoon is often focused on completing the current week’s
tasks.
• Long meetings may need to include breaks to allow participants to
respond to messages and refresh themselves.
• Meetings held during the last 15 minutes of the day will be quick,
but few people will remember what happened.
• Remote participants may need consideration for their time zones.
Choose the Meeting Location. Having a meeting at your own location
can give you an advantage: You feel more comfortable, which, along
with your guests’ newness to their surroundings, may give you an edge.
Holding the meeting on someone else’s premises, however, can signal
cooperation. For balance, especially when people are meeting for the
first time or are discussing sensitive issues, meet at a neutral site where
no one gains an advantage and attendees may feel freer to participate.
DIGITAL TIP
Conducting Meetings from Remote Locations
M
When participants cannotmeetface to face,consider holding a video-
conference or Web conference using groupware or whiteboard soft-
ware.Groupware allows meeting participants atremote locations to
perform collaborative activities, such as sharing documents, partici-
pating in real-time discussions,or commenting on documents.White-
board software allows participants to write on an interactive LCD
panel as though they were in a room with a whiteboard.Writings are
then displayed on each participant’s screen and can be saved or
printed. For links to Web sites with information on groupware and
whiteboard software, see bedfordstmartins.com/alredtech and select
Links for Handbook Entries.
Establish the Agenda. A tool for focusing the group, the agenda is an
outline of what the meeting will address. Always prepare an agenda for
a meeting, even if it is only an informal list of main topics. Ideally, the
agenda should be distributed to attendees a day or two before the meet-
ing. For a longer meeting in which participants are required to make a
presentation, try to distribute the agenda a week or more in advance.
The agenda should list the attendees, the meeting time and place,
and the topics you plan to discuss. If the meeting includes presenta-

=== Page 358 ===
6860ch0M.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 325
meetings 325
tions, list the time allotted for each speaker. Finally, indicate an approx-
imate length for the meeting so that participants can plan the rest of
their day. Figure M–2 shows a typical agenda.
Design Meeting Agenda
Purpose: To get creative ideas for the CZX software
Date: Monday,May 11,2009
Place: Conference Room E
Time: 9:30 a.m.–11:00 a.m.
Attendees: New Products Manager,Software Engineering Manager and
Designers,Technical Publications Manager,Technical Training
Manager
Topic Presenter Time
CZX Software Bob Arbuckle 9:30–9:45
The Campaign Maria Lopez 9:45–10:00
The Design Strategy Mary Winifred 10:00–10:15
Discussion Led by Dave Grimes 10:15–11:00
FIGURE M–2. Meeting Agenda
M
If the agenda is distributed in advance of the meeting, it should be
accompanied by a cover letter or message informing people of the fol-
lowing:
• The purpose of the meeting
• The date and place of the meeting
• The meeting start and stop times
• The names of the people invited
• Instructions on how to prepare
Figure M–3 shows a cover message to accompany an agenda.
Assign the Minute-Taking. Delegate the minute-taking to someone
other than the leader. The minute-taker should record major decisions
made and tasks assigned. To avoid misunderstandings, the minute-taker
needs to record each assignment, the person responsible for it, and the
date on which it is due.
For a standing committee, it is best to rotate the responsibility of
taking minutes. See also note-taking.

=== Page 359 ===
6860ch0M.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 326
326 meetings
From: “E.Lauter”<elauter@mmsoftware.com>
To: “R.Arbuckle”<arbuckle@mmsoftware.com>,
“D.Grimes”<dgrimes@mmsoftware.com>,
“M.Lopez”<mlopez@mmsoftware.com>,
“M.Winifred”<mwinifred@mmsoftware.com>,
“Design”<design_all@mmsoftware.com>
Sent: Tues,05 May 2009 13:30:12 EST
Subject: Design Meeting (May 11 at9:30 a.m.)
Attachments: Meeting Agenda.doc (29 KB)
Purpose of the Meeting
The purpose of this meeting is to getyour ideas for our new CZX
software.
Date,Time,and Location
Date: Monday,May 11,2009
Time: 9:30 a.m.–11:00 a.m.
Place: Conference Room E (go to the ground floor,take a rightoff the
elevator,third door on the left)
Attendees
Those addressed above
Meeting Preparation
M
Everyone should be prepared to offer suggestions on the following
topics:
• Features of the new software
• Techniques for designing the software
• Customer profile of potential buyers
• FAQs—questions customers may ask
Agenda
Please see the attached document.
FIGURE M–3. E-mail to Accompany an Agenda
Conducting the Meeting
Assign someone to write on a board or project a computer image of in-
formation that needs to be viewed by everyone present.
During the meeting, keep to your agenda; however, create a pro-
ductive environment by allowing room for differing views and fostering
an environment in which participants listen respectfully to one another.
• Consider the feelings, thoughts, ideas, and needs of others—do
not let your own agenda blind you to other points of view.

=== Page 360 ===
6860ch0M.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 327
meetings 327
• Help other participants feel valued and respected by listeningto
them and responding to what they say.
• Respond positively to the comments of others whenever possible.
• Consider communication styles and approaches that are different
from your own, particularly those from other cultures. See also
global communication.
Deal with Conflict. Despite your best efforts, conflict is inevitable. How-
ever, conflict is potentially valuable; when managed positively, it can
stimulate creative thinking by challenging complacency and showing
ways to achieve goals more efficiently or economically. See collaborative
writing.
Members of any group are likely to vary in their personalities and
attitudes, and you may encounter people who approach meetings differ-
ently. Consider the following tactics for the interruptive, negative, ram-
bling, overly quiet, and territorial personality types.
• The interruptive personrarely lets anyone finish a sentence and
may intimidate the group’s quieter members. Tell that person in a
firm but nonhostile tone to let the others finish in the interest of
getting everyone’s input. By addressing the issue directly, you signal
to the group the importance of putting common goals first.
• The negative personhas difficulty accepting change and often con- M
siders a new idea or project from a negative point of view. Such
negativity, if left unchecked, can demoralize the group and sup-
press enthusiasm for new ideas. If the negative person brings up a
valid point, however, ask for the group’s suggestions to remedy the
issue being raised. If the negative person’s reactions are not valid or
are outside the agenda, state the necessity of staying focused on the
agenda and perhaps recommend a separate meeting to address
those issues.
• The rambling personcannot collect his or her thoughts quickly
enough to verbalize them succinctly. Restate or clarify this person’s
ideas. Try to strike a balance between providing your own inter-
pretation and drawing out the person’s intended meaning.
• The overly quiet personmay be timid or may just be deep in
thought. Ask for this person’s thoughts, being careful not to em-
barrass the person. In some cases, you can have a quiet person jot
down his or her thoughts and give them to you later.
• The territorial personfiercely defends his or her group against real
or perceived threats and may refuse to cooperate with members of
other departments, companies, and so on. Point out that although
such concerns may be valid, everyone is working toward the same
overall goal and that goal should take precedence.

=== Page 361 ===
6860ch0M.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 328
328 memos
Close the Meeting. Just before closing the meeting, review all decisions
and assignments. Paraphrase each to help the group focus on what they
have agreed to do and to ensure that the minutes will be complete and
accurate. Now is the time to raise questions and clarify any misunder-
standings. Set a date by which everyone at the meeting can expect to re-
ceive copies of the minutes. Finally, thank everyone for participating,
and close the meeting on a positive note.
WRITER’S CHECKLIST Planning and Conducting Meetings
(cid:3)
Develop a purpose statementfor the meeting to focus your planning.
(cid:3)
Invite only those essential to fulfilling the purpose of the meeting.
(cid:3)
Selecta time and place convenientto all those attending.
(cid:3)
Create an agenda and distribute ita day or two before the meeting.
(cid:3)
Assign someone to take meeting minutes.
(cid:3)
Ensure thatthe minutes record key decisions;assignments;due
dates;and the date,time,and location of any follow-up meeting.
(cid:3)
Follow the agenda to keep everyone focused.
(cid:3)
Respectthe views of others and how they are expressed.
(cid:3)
Use the strategies in this entry for handling conflictand attendees
M
whose style of expression may preventgetting everyone’s best
thinking.
(cid:3)
Close the meeting by reviewing key decisions and assignments.
memos
Memos are documents that use a standard form (To:, From:, Date:,
Subject:) whether sent on paper or as attachments to e-mail messages.
They are used within organizations to report results, instruct employ-
ees, announce policies, disseminate information, and delegate responsi-
bilities.
Even in organizations where e-mail messages have largely taken the
function of memos, a printed or an attached memo with organizational
letterhead can communicate with formality and authority in addition to
offering the full range of word-processing features. Paper memos are
also useful in manufacturing and service industries, as well as in other
businesses where employees do not have easy access to e-mail. For a
discussion of writing strategies for memos, e-mail, and letters, see corre-
spondence. See also selectingthe medium.

=== Page 362 ===
6860ch0M.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 329
methods of development 329
Memo Format
The memo shown in Figure M–4 illustrates that the memo format can
be used not only for routine correspondence but also for short reports,
proposals, and other internal documents.
Although memo formats and conventions vary, the format (To:,
From:, Date:, Subject:) in Figure M–4 is typical. As this example also il-
lustrates, the use of headingsand listsoften fosters clarityand provides
emphasis in memos. For a discussion of subject lines, see correspon-
dence.
As with e-mail, be alert to the practices of addressing and distribut-
ing memos in your organization. Consider who should receive or needs
to be copied on a memo and in what order—senior managers, for ex-
ample, take precedence over junior managers. If rank does not apply,
alphabetizing recipients by last name is safe.
Some organizations ask writers to initial or sign printed memos to
verify that the writer accepts responsibility for a memo’s contents. Elec-
tronic copies of memos should not include simulated initials.
Additional Pages
When memos require more than one page, use a second-page header
and always carry at least two lines of the body text over to that page.
The header should include either the recipient’s name or an abbreviated M
subject line (if there are too many names to fit), the page number, and
the date. Place the header in the upper left-hand corner or across the
page, as shown in Figure M–5.
WEB LINK Writing Memos
For links to articles aboutwhen to write memos and tips for following
organization protocol,see bedfordstmartins.com/alredtechand select
Links for Handbook Entries.
methods of development
A logical method of development satisfies the readers’ need for shape
and structure in a document, whether it is an e-mail, a report, or a Web
page. It helps you as a writer move smoothly and logically from the in-
troductionto a conclusion.
Choose the method or, as is often the case, a combination of meth-
ods that best suits your subject, audience, and purpose. Following are

=== Page 363 ===
6860ch0M.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 330
330 memos
Professional Publishing Services
MEMORANDUM
TO: Barbara Smith, Publications Manager
FROM: Hannah Kaufman, Vice President
DATE: April 14, 2009
SUBJECT: Schedule for ACM Electronics Brochures
ACM Electronics has asked us to prepare a comprehensive set of brochures
for its Milwaukee office by August 10, 2009. We have worked with similar
firms in the past, so this job should be relatively easy to prepare. My guess
is that the job will take nearly two months. Ted Harris has requested time
and cost estimates for the project. Fred Moore in production will prepare
the cost estimates, and I would like you to prepare a tentative schedule for
the project.
Additional Personnel
M
In preparing the schedule, check the status of the following:
• Production schedule for all staff writers
• Availability of freelance writers
• Availability of dependable graphic designers
Ordinarily, we would not need to depend on outside personnel; however,
because our bid for the Wall Street Journalspecial project is still under
consideration, we could be short of staff in June and July. Further, we have
to consider vacations that have already been approved.
Time Estimates
Please give me time estimates by April 17. A successful job done on time
will give us a good chance to obtain the contract to do ACM Electronics’
annual report for its stockholders’meeting this fall.
I have enclosed several brochures that may be helpful.
cc: Ted Harris, President
Fred Moore, Production Editor
Enclosures: Sample Brochures
FIGURE M–4. Typical Memo Format(Printed with Sender’s Handwritten Initials)

=== Page 364 ===
6860ch0M.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 331
methods of development 331
ACM Brochure Schedule
Page 2
April 14, 2009
Barbara Smith 2 April 14, 2009
FIGURE M–5. Headers for the Second Page of Memos
the most common methods, each of which is discussed in further detail
in its own entry.
• Cause-and-effectmethod of developmentbegins with either the
cause or the effect of an event. This approach can be used to de-
velop a report that offers a solution to a problem, beginning with
M
the problem and moving on to the solution or vice versa.
• Chronological method of developmentemphasizes the time element
of a sequence, as in a trouble reportthat traces events as they oc-
curred in time.
• Comparison method of developmentis useful when writing about a
new topic that is in many ways similar to another topic that is
more familiar to your readers.
• Definition method of developmentextends definitions with addi-
tional details, examples, comparisons, or other explanatory
devices. See also definingterms.
• Division-and-classification method of developmenteither separates
a whole into component parts and discusses each part separately
(division) or groups parts into categories that clarify the relation-
ship of the parts (classification).
• General and specific methods of developmentproceed either from
general information to specific details or from specific information
to a general conclusion.
• Order-of-importance method of developmentpresents information
in either decreasing order of importance, as in a proposalthat
begins with the most important point, or increasing order of

=== Page 365 ===
6860ch0M.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 332
332 minutes of meetings
importance, as in a presentationthat ends with the most important
point.
• Sequential method of developmentemphasizes the order of ele-
ments in a process and is particularly useful when writing
step-by-step instructions.
• Spatial method of developmentdescribes the physical appearance
of an object or area from top to bottom, inside to outside, front to
back, and so on.
Rarely does a writer rely on only one of these methods. Documents
often blend methods of development. For example, in a report that de-
scribes the organization of a company, you might use elements from
three methods of development. You could divide the larger topic (the
company) into operations (division and classification), arrange the op-
erations according to what you see as their impact within the company
(order of importance), and present their manufacturing operations in
the order they occur (sequential). As this example illustrates, when out-
lining a document, you may base your major division on one primary
method of development appropriate to your purpose and then subordi-
nate other methods to it.
M
minutes of meetings
Organizations and committees that keep official records of their
meetings refer to such records as minutes. Because minutes are often
used to settle disputes, they must be accurate, complete, and clear.
When approved, minutes of meetings are official and can be used as
evidence in legal proceedings. An example of minutes is shown in Fig-
ure M–6.
Keep your minutes brief and to the point. Except for recording for-
mally presented motions, which must be transcribed word for word,
summarize what occurs and paraphrase discussions. To keep the min-
utes concise, follow a set format, and use headingsfor each major point
discussed. See also note-taking.
Avoid abstractions and generalities; always be specific. Refer to
everyone in the same way—a lack of consistency in titles or names may
suggest a deference to one person at the expense of another. Avoid ad-
jectives and adverbs that suggest good or bad qualities, as in “Mr.
Sturgess’s capable assistant read the comprehensive report to the sub-
committee.” Minutes should be objective and impartial.
If a member of the committee is to follow up on something and re-
port back to the committee at its next meeting, clearly state the person’s
name and the responsibility he or she has accepted.

=== Page 366 ===
6860ch0M.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 333
minutes of meetings 333
NORTH TAMPA MEDICAL CENTER
Minutes of the Monthly Meeting
Medical Audit Committee
DATE: June 23, 2009
PRESENT: G. Miller (Chair), C. Bloom, J. Dades, K. Gilley,
D. Ingoglia (Secretary), S. Ramirez
ABSENT: D. Rowan, C. Tsien, C. Voronski, R. Fautier, R. Wolf
Dr. Gail Miller called the meeting to order at 12:45 p.m. Dr. David
Ingoglia made a motion that the June 2, 2009, minutes be approved as
distributed. The motion was seconded and passed.
The committee discussed and took action on the following topics.
(1) TOPIC: Meeting Time
Discussion: The most convenient time for the committee to meet.
Action taken: The committee decided to meet on the fourth Tuesday
of every month, at 12:30p.m.
M
FIGURE M–6. Minutes of a Meeting
WRITER’S CHECKLIST Preparing Minutes of Meetings
Include the following in meeting minutes:
(cid:3)
The name of the group or committee holding the meeting
(cid:3)
The topic of the meeting
(cid:3)
The kind of meeting (a regular meeting or a special meeting called to
discuss a specific subjector problem)
(cid:3)
The number of members presentand,for committees or boards of
ten or fewer members,the names of those presentand absent
(cid:3)
The place,time,and date of the meeting
(cid:3)
A statementthatthe chair and the secretary were presentor the
names of any substitutes
(cid:3)
A statementthatthe minutes of the previous meeting were approved
or revised
(cid:3)
A listof any reports thatwere read and approved

=== Page 367 ===
6860ch0M.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 334
334 mixed constructions
Writer’s Checklist:Preparing Minutes of Meetings (continued)
(cid:3)
All the main motions thatwere made,with statements as to whether
they were carried,defeated,or tabled (vote postponed),and the
names of those who made and seconded the motions (motions that
were withdrawn are notmentioned)
(cid:3)
A full description of resolutions thatwere adopted and a simple
statementof any thatwere rejected
(cid:3)
A record of all ballots with the number of votes castfor and against
resolutions
(cid:3)
The time the meeting was adjourned (officially ended) and the place,
time,and date of the nextmeeting
(cid:3)
The recording secretary’s signature and typed name and,if desired,
the signature of the chairperson
mixed constructions
A mixed construction is a sentence in which the elements do not sensi-
bly fit together. The problem may be a grammar error, a logic error, or
M
both.
,
(cid:2) Because the copier wouldn’t start explains whywe called a
^
technician.
The original sentence mixes a subordinate clause (Because the copier
wouldn’t start) with a verb(explains) that attempts to incorrectly use the
subordinate clause as its subject. The revision correctly uses the pronoun
weas the subject of the main clause. See also sentence construction.
modifiers
Modifiers are words, phrases, or clauses that expand, limit, or make
otherwise more specific the meaning of other elements in a sentence. Al-
though we can create sentences without modifiers, we often need the
detail and clarification they provide.
WITHOUT MODIFIERS Production decreased.
WITH MODIFIERS Glucoseproduction decreased rapidly.

=== Page 368 ===
6860ch0M.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 335
modifiers 335
Most modifiers function as adjectives or adverbs. Adjectives describe
qualities or impose boundaries on the words they modify.
(cid:2) noisymachinery, tenfiles, thisprinter, aworkstation
An adverb modifies an adjective, another adverb, a verb, or an entire
clause.
(cid:2) Under test conditions, the brake pad showed muchless wear than
it did under actual conditions.
[The adverb muchmodifies the adjective less.]
(cid:2) The redesigned brake pad lasted muchlonger.
[The adverb muchmodifies another adverb, longer.]
(cid:2) The wrecking ball hit the wall of the building hard.
[The adverb hardmodifies the verb hit.]
(cid:2) Surprisingly, the motor failed even after all the durability and
performance tests it had passed.
[The adverb surprisinglymodifies an entire clause.]
Adverbs are intensifiers when they increase the impact of adjectives
(very fine, too high) or adverbs (very slowly, rather quickly). Be cau-
tious using intensifiers; their overuse can lead to vagueness and a result-
ing lack of precision.
M
Stacked (Jammed) Modifiers
Stacked (or jammed) modifiers are strings of modifiers preceding nouns
that make writing unclear or difficult to read.
(cid:2) Your staffing-level authorization reassessmentplan should result in
a major improvement.
The noun plan is preceded by three long modifiers, a string that forces
the reader to slow down to interpret its meaning. Stacked modifiers
often result from a tendency to overuse buzzwords or jargon. See how
breaking up the stacked modifiers makes the example easier to read.
(cid:2) Your plan for reassessing the staffing-level authorizations should
result in a major improvement.
Misplaced Modifiers
A modifier is misplaced when it modifies the wrong word or phrase. A
misplaced modifier can cause ambiguity.
(cid:2) We almostlost all of the parts.
[The parts were almostlost but were not.]

=== Page 369 ===
6860ch0M.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 336
336 mood
(cid:2) We lost almostall of the parts.
[Most of the parts were in fact lost.]
To avoid ambiguity, place modifiers as close as possible to the words
they are intended to modify. Likewise, place phrases near the words
they modify. Note the two meanings possible when the phrase is shifted
in the following sentences:
(cid:2) The equipment without the accessoriessold the best.
[Different types of equipment were available, some with and some
without accessories.]
(cid:2) The equipment sold the best without the accessories.
[One type of equipment was available, and the accessories were
optional.]
Place clauses as close as possible to the words they modify.
REMOTE We sent the brochure to several local firms that had four-
color art.
CLOSE We sent the brochure that had four-color artto several
local firms.
Squinting Modifiers
M
A squinting modifier is one that can be interpreted as modifying either
of two sentence elements simultaneously, thereby confusing readers
about which is intended. See also dangling modifiers.
(cid:2) We agreed on the next dayto make the adjustments.
[Did they agree to make the adjustmentson the next day?
Or on the next day, did they agree to make the adjustments?]
A squinting modifier can sometimes be corrected simply by changing its
position, but often it is better to rewrite the sentence.
(cid:2) We agreed that on the next daywe would make the adjustments.
[The adjustments were to be made on the next day.]
(cid:2) On the next day, we agreed that we would make the adjustments.
[The agreement was made on the next day.]
mood
The grammatical term mood refers to the verb functions that indicate
whether the verb is intended to make a statement, ask a question, give a
command, or express a hypothetical possibility.

=== Page 370 ===
6860ch0M.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 337
mood 337
The indicative mood states a fact, gives an opinion, or asks a
question.
(cid:2) The setting iscorrect.
(cid:2) Isthe setting correct?
The imperative moodexpresses a command, suggestion, request, or
plea. In the imperative mood, the implied subject you is not expressed.
(Installthe system today.)
The subjunctive moodexpresses something that is contrary to fact,
conditional, hypothetical, or purely imaginative; it can also express a
wish, a doubt, or a possibility. In the subjunctive mood, wereis used in-
stead of was in clauses that speculate about the present or future, and
the base form (be) is used following certain verbs, such as propose, re-
quest, or insist. See also progressive tense.
(cid:2) If we wereto finish the tests today, we would be ahead of schedule.
(cid:2) The research director insisted that she [I, you, we, they] bethe
project leader.
The most common use of the subjunctive mood is to express clearly
that the writer considers a condition to be contrary to fact. If the condi-
M
tion is not considered to be contrary to fact, use the indicative mood.
ESL TIPSfor Determining Mood
In written and especially in spoken English,the tendency increasingly
is to use the indicative mood where the subjunctive traditionally has
been used.Note the differences between traditional and contemporary
usage in the following examples.
Traditional (formal) use of the subjunctive mood
(cid:2) I wish he werehere now.
(cid:2) If I weregoing to the conference, I would room with him.
(cid:2) I requested that she showup on time.
Contemporary (informal) use of the indicative mood
(cid:2) I wish he washere now.
(cid:2) If I wasgoing to the conference, I would room with him.
(cid:2) I requested that she showsup on time.
In professional writing, it is better to use the more traditional ex-
pressions.

=== Page 371 ===
6860ch0M.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:52 AM Page 338
338 Ms./ Miss / Mrs.
SUBJUNCTIVE If I werepresident of the firm, I would change
several hiring policies.
INDICATIVE Although I ampresident of the firm, I don’t control
every aspect of its policies.
Ms. / Miss / Mrs.
Ms. is widely used in business and public life to address or refer to a
woman, especially if her marital status is either unknown or irrelevant
to the context. Traditionally, Miss is used to refer to an unmarried
woman, and Mrs. is used to refer to a married woman. Some women
may indicate a preference for Ms., Miss, or Mrs., which you should
honor. If a woman has an academic or a professional title, use the ap-
propriate form of address (Doctor, Professor, Captain) instead of Ms.,
Miss, or Mrs.See also biased language.
mutual / common
M Common is used when two or more persons (or things) share some-
thing or possess it jointly.
(cid:2) We have a commondesire to make the program succeed.
(cid:2) The fore and aft guidance assemblies have a commonpower
source.
Mutualmay also mean “shared” (mutualfriend, of mutualbenefit), but
it usually implies something given and received reciprocally and is used
with reference to only two persons or parties.
(cid:2) Melek respects Roth, and from my observations the respect is
mutual.
[Roth also respects Melek.]

=== Page 372 ===
6860ch0N.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:53 AM Page 339
N
narration
Narration is the presentation of a series of events in a prescribed (often
chronological) sequence. Much narrative writing explains how something
happened: a laboratory study, a site visit, an accident, the decisions in
an important meeting. See also chronological method of developoment,
trip reports, and trouble reports.
Effective narration rests on two key writing techniques: the careful,
accurate sequencing of events and a consistent pointof viewon the part
of the narrator. Narrative sequence and essential shifts in the sequence
are signaled in three ways: chronology (clock and calendar time), tran-
sitional words pertaining to time (before, after, next, first, while, then),
and verb tenses that indicate whether something has happened (past
tense) or is under way (present tense). The point of view indicates the
writer’s relation to the information being narrated as reflected in the use N
of person. Narration usually expresses a first- or third-person point of
view. First-person narration indicates that the writer is a participant,
and third-person narration indicates that the writer is writing about
what happened to someone or something else.
The narrative shown in Figure N–1 reconstructs the chronology of
an early-morning accident of Chicago Transit Authority Green Line
train run 2. This train struck two signal maintainers who were working
near a tower on the section of the Chicago Loop that is above the inter-
section of Lake and Wells streets. The Loop is elevated, and one main-
tainer fell from the structure, landing on a parked car and then the
street. The investigators needed to “tell the story” in detail so that any
lessons learned could be used to improve safety. To do that, they re-
count and sequence events as precisely as possible. The verb tenses
throughout indicate past action: approached, continued, heard, removed,
stopped.
Although narration often exists in combination with other forms of
discourse (description, exposition, persuasion), avoid interrupting a
narrative with lengthy explanations or analyses. Explain only what is
necessary for readers to follow the events. See audience.
339

=== Page 373 ===
6860ch0N.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:53 AM Page 340
340 narration
The Accident*
On the morning of the accident, two night-shift signal maintainers were repairing
a switch at tower 18. Between 4:00 and 4:30 a.m., two day-shift maintainers
joined them.1As the two crews conferred about the progress of the repair, Green
Line train run 1 approached the tower. A trainee was operating the train, and a
train operator/line instructor2was observing. Both crew members on the train
later stated that they had not heard the control center’s radioed advisory that
workers were on the track structure at tower 18. The line instructor said that as
the train approached the tower with a proceed(green) signal, he observed way-
side maintenance personnel from about 150 feet away and told the trainee to stop
the train, which he did. One of the maintainers gave the train a hand signal to pro-
ceed, and the train continued on its way. Shortly after the train left, the night-shift
maintainers also left.
The day-shift maintainers continued to work. Just before the accident, they
removed a defective part and started to install a replacement. According to both
men, they were squatting over the switch machine. One was facing the center of
the track and attaching wires, while the other was facing the Loop with his back
to the normal direction of train movements. He was shining a flashlight on the
work area.
The accident train approached the tower on the proceedsignal. One main-
tainer later said that he remembered being hit by the train, while the other said
that he was hit by “something.” A train operator/line instructor was operating the
train, and a trainee was observing. Both later said that they had not seen any way-
side workers. They said that they had heard noise that the student described as a
“thump” in the vicinity of the accident and caught a “glimpse” of something.
Both maintainers later stated that they had not seen or heard the train as it ap-
proached. After being struck, one of the maintainers fell from the structure. The
other fell to the deck of the platform on the outside of the structure. He used his
N radio to tell the control center that he and another maintainer had been “hit by the
train.” Emergency medical personnel were dispatched to the scene, and an ambu-
lance took both men to a local hospital.
In the meantime, the accident train continued past the tower and stopped at
the next station, Clark and Lake, where the crew members inspected the train
from the platform and found no damage. They continued on their way until they
heard the radio report that workers had been struck by a train. They stopped their
train at the next station and reported to a supervisor.
According to the operator of the accident train, nothing had distracted her
from her duties, and she had been facing forward and watching the track before
the train arrived at tower 18. The trainee supported her account. Both crew
members said that they had not heard the control center’s radioed advisory
that workers were on the track structure at tower 18.
1All times referred to in this report are central standard time.
2Line instructors are working train operators who provide on-the-job training to
operator trainees.
*Source: National Transportation Safety Board, “Railroad Accident Brief:
Chicago Transit Authority, DCA-02-FR-005, Chicago, Illinois, February 26,
2002.” www.ntsb.gov/publictn/2003/RAB0304.htm
FIGUREN–1. Narration from an AccidentReport

=== Page 374 ===
6860ch0N.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:53 AM Page 341
newsletter articles 341
nature
Nature, when used to mean “kind” or “sort,” is vague. Avoid this
usage in your writing. Say exactly what you mean.
exclusionary clause in
(cid:2) The nature ofthe contract caused the problem.
^
needless to say
The phrase needless to say sometimes occurs in speech and writing.
Eliminate the phrase or replace it with a more descriptive word choice.
Service logs indicate that
(cid:2) Needless to say,staff reductions have decreased customer loyalty.
^
newsletter articles
If your organization publishes a newsletter, you may be asked to con-
tribute an article on a subject in your area of expertise. In fact, an ar-
ticle is a good way to promote your work or your department.
Before you begin to write, consider the traditional who, what, N
where, when, and why of journalism (“Who did it? What was done?
Where was it done? When was it done? Why was it done?”) and then
add how, which may be of as much interest to your colleagues as any of
the five w’s. Next, determine whether the company has an official pol-
icy or position on your subject. If it does, adhere to it as you prepare
your article. If there is no company policy, determine your manage-
ment’s attitude toward your subject.
Gather several fairly recent issues of the newsletter and study the
styleand toneof the writing and the approach used for various kinds of
subjects. Understand those perspectives before you begin to work on
your own article. Ask yourself the following questions about your sub-
ject: What is its significance to the organization? What is its significance
to my coworkers? The answers to those questions should help you es-
tablish the style, tone, and approach for your article and also heavily in-
fluence your conclusion. See also context.
Research for a newsletter article frequently consists of interviewing
for information. Interview key personnel concerned with your subject.
Get all available information and all points of view. Be sure to give maxi-
mum credit to the maximum number of people by quoting statements

=== Page 375 ===
6860ch0N.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:53 AM Page 342
342 newsletter articles
from those involved in projects and naming those who have developed
initiatives. See also quotations.
Figure N–2 shows an article written for Connection, a newsletter
produced by Ken Cook Company and distributed to current and
prospective clients. This article describes how the company developed a
print-on-demand technology called media①off™.Notice that the side-
bar at the right of the page (“Tech Tools”) uses visual elements to draw
Online Solution Speeds Video Delivery
Y
re
o
c
u
e
’v
n
e
t p
p
u
ro
rc
b
h
a
a
b
s
ly
e
h
o
e
f
a
Y
r
o
d
u T
a
u
b
b
o
e
u t
f o
G
r
o
$
o
1
g
.
l
6
e
5
’s D
no
e
w
a le
a
r
b
s
le
a
t
n
o
d
d
e
o
n
w
d
n
u
lo
s
a
e
d
rs
o
w
r
o
b
r
u
ld
rn
-w
tr
i
a
d
i
e
n i
a
n
r
g
e tech
b
Y
s
o
h
il
u
l
a
io
T
ri
n
u
n
b
g
in
e
w
a
is
e
s
b
a
t o
s
p
c
i
o
t
k
e
p
- f
u
w
o
l
r
a
h
-
r
i
s
c
t
f
h
o
re
c
l
e
e
k
t s
v
tr
i
a
d
u
n
e
s
s
o
e
a
rs
ction. v
T
i
h
d
e
e
s
o
e
s
f
t
i
o
le
D
s
V
c
D
an
s o
b
n
e
d
u
e
s
m
ed
a n
to
d. ools
upload, view, and share video clips. demonstrate equipment operation,
safety awareness, service and
In the six short months following its maintenance instructions, sales
debut in November 2005, YouTube training, as well as marketing and
was ranked the tenth most popular promotional applications.
website by Alexa, the Amazon.com-
owned subsidiary that tracks web With the media off™video file media off™
traffic. It’s estimated that 20 million solution, the costs associated with functionality now includes
visitors log on to YouTube each month. warehousing training program VHS, the ability to print large
CD or DVD kits no longer exist. system schematics as part
What the YouTube craze has There’s no need to forecast the of the one-off production
demonstrated is the increasing amount of orders for these materials, process. These schematics
success and popularity of video pay for duplication up-front, or store have two delivery options
content distribution. Leading an inventory that may go unused. including rolled and
N m c i v d p a m o i i r n d s a o p m d e t n g r r o m i u o c r b a u v f u t i a m t e e s t m c i m c t s o t o h e u n e m f n n r o n e t o t e r o t r l t r s o t o a s h p g . r t e r c e h y o i o a r v a c n t e i h l d t s m m i a e n o n a u p t d n i o r l n o a e e u t y i v a l s n s e e i i n e n l o o s g f a p , i d n e g alers C s w s i a d i i d o m i t e t e d h m n . p s t T o p l i y f t h t a i h e h d e n e s e r i m e s o r a y s p s n t s u o t d t t h h p e t a r e p m h e t i o e r t u r r a v i t w s e u i f e d v e t il o e e e b m m s o s -b e , a t f a h d i o t l s i e o i n c a e s s t a o , d e l l a y o a f l i f n o l f e ™ n s f g t p and s a r a h a n c n i n d a p d 5 g n p 0 s i l e 0 n a h b d r g i e f g p e i a p e p n e l r e t l f t i o d n u l t o h r . t b m n e e S e d g c s a w . h t i o a n e i y r m m s f u a i o a z p g l t e d i e c s t e s o s d
“Equipment a
o
m
c
f
e
t
q
e
d
u
n
ia
i s
a
i
s
ti o
o
n
n
f
e
f
.
™
e
F
d
i
b
l
e
e
o
d
s
o
—
c
k
a
s
e
n
t
v
o
e
r
b
n
e
e
d
f
u
o
a
p
r
i l
d
i
y
m
a
—
t
m
e
s
d
e
o
d
a
u
ia
s
p
t
-
e tech
manufacturers & others to-date materials are available 24/7. ools
can now offer video Instructors or students/learners can
order training kits and materials online
libraries, in addition to at the time of registration and receive
printed/downloadable them the next day, improving delivery
text files, on the online efficiency and reducing wait times.
book K s e t n o r C e o s o h k o C st o e . d ” by D t t r o a e o i a n r l i d e n e r g s r v a m id ls a e o t o e h r l i a i a b v l r s e a r t i o i n e s s r t e , a v a n ie l t l o w a w c s i c n e e g r s v s t i h c t e e o m D T e h m e a n n d ew (P P O ri D n ) t p O r n int
techniques, view safety practices and manuals feature utilizes
K a so n e l d n u t i C i s o o n c o s o k m t h C m a o t i . t t m r e e d e a e l t i t o z c e p u s r s o t t h v o i i m d s i e n c r h g a n l e le e n d g s e d f c u l e i n c li d k v a e o m r f e e th d n e u ta c m l a t o t o io u t n s h e a e . l j l o e b ss , o w n it s h just a m in o e v to d m e i r 8 a a s . n i 5 z u ” e o a x d f l f s ™ 1 & 1 c ” c o t o o n p l t a t o a r g r a i n e n p i s s n a f i g g o z e e r s m s
and keep pace with the latest Entertainment’s online video content with color pages
breakthroughs in technology. distribution, marked by YouTube’s automatically converted to
Recognizing that video and animation overwhelming success, is gaining black & white patterns. The
clips are an instrumental element in popularity due to its ability to provide conversion also includes
training, the company has updated its international access, cost effectiveness converting oversized or
media off™literature fulfillment and maximum customer value. large format schematics
system to handle video files for “one- Similarly, for manufacturers and into segmented 8.5” x 11”
off” production. other businesses, the Ken Cook Co. pages with a preview
This means that equipment m pu e t d s ia train o i f n f™ g e v le id m eo e n li t b s r , a s r u y c s h o a lu s t io vi n deo la p y e o rf u o t r p m a e g d e . a C t t o h n e v e ti r m si e o n th i e s
manufacturers and others can now and animation files, in the hands of order is placed & allows
offer video libraries, in addition to end-users world-wide, saving time customers to track &
printed/downloadable text files on and eliminating warehousing costs manage only one file for
the online bookstores hosted by and achieving best-in-class both full color & POD
Ken Cook Co. customer satisfaction. publications.
January 2007 www.media1off.com 7
FIGURE N–2. Newsletter Article

=== Page 376 ===
6860ch0N.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:53 AM Page 343
newsletters 343
readersto the article as well as giving them a sense of its content. By de-
scribing this system, the article aims to demonstrate Ken Cook Com-
pany’s commitment “to providing solutions that meet customer needs
and keep pace with the latest breakthroughs in technology.”
WRITER’S CHECKLIST Writing Newsletter Articles
Writing a newsletter article requires a more journalistic approach than
writing a report.Because newsletters are notrequired reading,you do not
have a captive audience.
(cid:3)
Write an intriguing titleto catch the audience’s attention;rhetorical
questionsoften work well.
(cid:3)
Include as many eye-catching photographsor visualsas appropriate
to entice your audience to read the lead paragraphof your introduc-
tion.See also layoutand design.
(cid:3)
Fashion a lead,or firstparagraph,thatwill encourage further read-
ing.The firstparagraph generally makes the transitionfrom the title
to the body of the article.
(cid:3)
Offer a well-developed presentation of your subjectto hold the read-
ers’interestall the way to the end of the article.
(cid:3)
Write a conclusionthatemphasizes the significance of your subject
to your audience and stresses the points you wantyour readers to re-
tain.See emphasis. N
(cid:3)
Follow the steps listed in the Checklistof the Writing Process on pages
xxiii–xxiv as you prepare your newsletter article.
newsletters
Newsletters are publications that are designed to inform and to create
and sustain interest and membership in an organization. They can also
be used to sell products and services. The two main types of newsletters
are organizational newsletters and subscription newsletters.
Types of Newsletters
Organizational newsletterslike the one shown in Figure N–3 are sent to
employees, clients, or members of an association to keep them informed
about issues regarding their company or group, such as the develop-
ment of new products or policies or the accomplishments of individuals
or teams. Stories in organizational newsletters can both enhance the
image and foster pride among employees of the organization’s products

=== Page 377 ===
6860ch0N.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:53 AM Page 344
344 newsletters
OOccttoobbeerr//NNoovveemmbbeerr 22000066
wwwwww..kkeennccooookk..ccoomm
Volvo EPA Solution a Model for 2007
Volvo Cars of North America lead the way in EPAregulation compliance with www.volvotechinfo.com
As 2007 approaches, the heavy were put into place for light- and independent service facilities, tool
truck industry will implement the medium-duty vehicles in 1995, for companies and aftermarket part
Environmental Protection Agency model year 1994 and later.All service manufacturers have access to the
(EPA) service information requirements information was located at an EPA same types of emission-related service
40 CFR Part 46 internet site called FedWorld.In 2003, information and tools that vehicle and
(http://www.epa.gov/otaq/regs/im/vehse the EPA updated the regulation, engine manufacturers provide to
rv/serv_cfr.pdf).These requirements requiring each manufacturer to supply franchised dealerships.
N In this issue: a O sy n n s - i t n B e d m o e a p r in d e f n o D d r i m e a n g a t n t i w o o s n e t . b ic W s s it h e II e c n (O o c n B h t D a a i n - n I g I in ) e g s W ve h h e ic n le a ’s m O a n l - fu B n o c a t r io d n D is ia g d n e o te s c ti t c e d (O b B y D a )
were made to the original regulation, system, the “check engine”or “service
Volvo EPA Solution a Model for 2007. . Page 1 the requirement was also extended to engine soon”light illuminates on the
From the President:. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page 2 2007 and later model year heavy-duty vehicle’s instrument panel, and
World Class Owner’s Manuals at vehicles.A staged approach to diagnostic information is stored in the
IBEX. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page 2 implementation for heavy-duty vehicle on-board computer.By using this
M Sm ak a i l n le g r Y . o . u . r . . B . i g . . J . o . b . s . . S . e . e . m . . . . . . . . . . Page 4 m ful a l n c u o f m ac p t l u ia re n r c s e b r e e g q i u n i s re a d t b th y i s 2 0 ti 1 m 3 e . , with i e n m fo i r s m si a o t n io -r n e l t a o t e q d u i p ck ro ly b l i e d m en s t , i f t y h e a n li d fe r t e im p e air
Best Practices for Project Stability. . . Page 5 emissions from motor vehicles can be
Increased Capacity for Industry estimates indicate that minimized.However, because emission
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page 5 independent technicians perform up to levels are not reduced until the vehicle
What Does ISO 9001:2000 Mean 80% of all vehicle service and repairs. is successfully repaired, it is critical that
to the Supply Chain? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page 6 The purpose of the EPA service independent service technicians have
Employee Spotlight:Bruce Radtke. . . Page 7 information regulations is to ensure that access to the information and
(Continued on page 3)
October/November2006 www.media1off.com 1
FIGUREN–3. Company Newsletter (FrontPage)
or services. For example, Figure N–3 shows how Ken Cook Company
links the quality of its publications with the ability of service personnel
to meet Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) standards for an auto
manufacturer.
Subscription newslettersare designed to attract and build a reader-
ship interested in buying specific products or services or in learning
more about a specific subject. Subscribers are buying information, and

=== Page 378 ===
6860ch0N.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:53 AM Page 345
newsletters 345
they expect value for their money. For example, a person with experi-
ence in the stock market could create a financial newsletter and charge
subscribers a monthly fee for the investing advice in that newsletter; a
person who collects movie memorabilia could create an online newslet-
ter that includes stories about ways to find and sell rare movie posters.
Developing Newsletters
Before you begin to develop a newsletter, decide on its specific purpose
and the specific audience you will be targeting; then make sure the
newsletter’s appearance and editorial choices create a sense of identifi-
cation among the readership. Newsletters often involve collaborative
writingin which different individuals work on design, content, and proj-
ect management. See also persuasion. If you are asked to contribute an
article to a newsletter, see newsletter articles.
You will need to acquire a mailing list (names and addresses of your
readers) and decide on the most strategic way to get the newsletter to
these readers (whether through postal mail, interoffice mail, e-mail, or
Web posting). Because it can be time-consuming and technically prob-
lematic to send out hundreds or thousands of online newsletters by
yourself, you may also need to subscribe to a online list-hosting service.*
Your research should include trade journals, business and technol-
ogy magazines, the Web, and other sources to find specific angles for
the articles that will appeal to your select audience. Attempt to provide
content that your readers will not find elsewhere, for example, by inter-
N
viewing and profiling customers, association members, or employees.
Check your facts meticulously—newsletter readers are often specialists
in their fields. Because newsletters are often distributed to branches and
clients abroad, see global communication and global graphics. See also
interviewing for information.
As shown in Figures N–2 and N–3, a newsletter’s format should be
simple and consistent, yet visually appealing to your readership. Use the
active voiceand a conversational tone. Use headingsand bullets to break
up the text and make the newsletter easy to read. Keep your sentences
simple and paragraphs short. See concisenessand layoutand design.
Using word-processing, desktop-publishing, or Web-development
software, create newspaper columns and one or two visuals per page
that complement the text. On the front page, identify the organization,
include the date, volume and issue numbers, and a contents box. For
Web newsletters, follow the principles of good Web design. See also lay-
outand design, photographsand writing for the Web.
*E-mail list-hosting services have their own servers and provide commercial delivery
of premium e-mail that often contains graphic and other digital forms used for ad-
vertising.

=== Page 379 ===
6860ch0N.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:53 AM Page 346
346 nominalizations
nominalizations
A nominalization is a noun form of a verb that is often combined with
vague and general (or “weak”) verbs like make, do, give, perform, pro-
vide. Avoid nominalizations when you can use specific verbs that com-
municate the same idea more directly and concisely.
indicate
(cid:2) The tests will give an indicationif the virus is present.
^
evaluate
(cid:2) The staff should perform an evaluation ofthe new software.
^
If you use nominalizations solely to make your writing sound more for-
mal, the result will be affectation. You may occasionally have an appro-
priate use for a nominalization. For example, you might use a nominal-
ization to slow the paceof your writing. See also conciseness, technical
writing style, and voice.
none
None can be either a singular or a plural pronoun, depending on the
context. See also agreement.
(cid:2) Noneof the material hasbeen ordered.
N [Always use a singular verbwith a singular noun, in this case,
“material.”]
(cid:2) Noneof the clients hasbeen called yet.
[Use a singular verb even with a plural noun (clients) if the
intended emphasis is on the idea of not one.]
(cid:2) Noneof the clients havebeen called yet.
[Use a plural verb if you intend noneto refer to all clients.]
For emphasis, substitute no oneor not one for noneand use a singular
verb.
not one
(cid:2) We paid the retail price for three of the machines, noneof which
^
was worth the money.
nor / or
Nor always follows neither in sentences with continuing negation.
(“They will neithersupport norapprove the plan.”) Likewise, orfollows
eitherin sentences. (“The firm will accept eithera short-term ora long-
term loan.”)

=== Page 380 ===
6860ch0N.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:53 AM Page 347
note-taking 347
Two or more singular subjects joined by or or nor usually take a
singular verb. However, when one subject is singular and one is plural,
the verb agrees with the subject nearer to it. See also conjunctions and
parallel structure.
SINGULAR Neither the architectnor the clientwashappy with the
design.
PLURAL Neither the architectnor the clients werehappy with
the design.
SINGULAR Neither the architectsnor the client washappy with the
design.
note-taking
The purpose of note-taking is to summarize and record information
you extract during research. (For taking notes at a meeting, see minutes
of meetings.) The challenge in taking notes is to condense someone
else’s thoughts into your own words without distorting the original
thinking. As you extract information, let your knowledge of the audi-
enceand the purposeof your writing guide you.
ETHICS NOTE Resist copying your source word for word as you take
notes; instead, paraphrase the author’s idea or concept. If you only
N
change a few words from a source and incorporate that text into your
document, you will be guilty of plagiarism. See also paraphrasing. ✦
On occasion, when an expert source states something that is espe-
cially precise, striking, or noteworthy or that reinforces your point, you
can justifiably quote the source directly and incorporate it into your
document. If you use a direct quote, enclose the material in quotation
marks in your notes. In your finished writing, provide the source of
your quotation. Normally, you will rarely need to quote anything
longer than a paragraph. See also documenting sourcesand quotations.
When taking notes on abstract ideas, as opposed to factual data,
do not sacrifice clarity for brevity—notes expressing concepts can lose
their meaning if they are too brief. The critical test is whether you can
understand the note a week later and recall the significant ideas of the
passage. Consider the information in the following paragraph:
Long before the existence of bacteria was suspected, techniques
were in use for combating their influence in, for instance, the de-
composition of meat. Salt and heat were known to be effective,
and these do in fact kill bacteria or prevent them from multiplying.
Salt acts by the osmotic effect of extracting water from the bacte-
rial cell fluid. Bacteria are less easily destroyed by osmotic action

=== Page 381 ===
6860ch0N.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:53 AM Page 348
348 note-taking
than are animal cells because their cell walls are constructed in a
totally different way, which makes them much less permeable.
The paragraph says essentially three things:
1. Before the discovery of bacteria, salt and heat were used to combat
the effects of bacteria.
2. Salt kills bacteria by extracting water from their cells by osmosis,
hence its use in curing meat.
3. Bacteria are less affected by the osmotic effect of salt than are
animal cells, because bacterial cell walls are less permeable.
If your readers’ needs and your objective involve tracing the origin of
the bacterial theory of disease, you might want to note that salt was tra-
ditionally used to kill bacteria long before people realized what caused
meat to spoil. It might not be necessary to your topic to say anything
about the relative permeability of bacterial cell walls.
You should record notes in a way you find efficient. Some find vari-
ous shareware note and index programs useful. However, jotting notes
on 3 ×5-inch index cards is often more flexible, and the cards are espe-
cially useful for outliningcomplex and long-term projects.*
WRITER’S CHECKLIST Taking Notes
(cid:3)
Ask yourself the following questions:Whatinformation do I need to
fulfill my purpose? Whatare the needs of my audience?
N
(cid:3)
Record only the mostimportantideas and concepts.Be sure to record
all vital names,dates,and definitions.
(cid:3)
When in doubtaboutwhether to take a note,consider the difficulty
of finding the source again should you wantitlater.
(cid:3)
Use quotations when sources state something thatis precise,striking,
or noteworthy or thatsuccinctly reinforces a pointyou are making.
(cid:3)
Ensure proper credit.Record the author;title;publisher;place;page num-
ber;URL;and date of publication,posting,or retrieval.(On subsequent
notes from the same source,include only the author and page number.)
(cid:3)
Use your own shorthand and record notes in a way thatyou find
efficient,whether in an electronic documentor on index cards.
(cid:3)
Photocopy or download pages and highlightpassages thatyou intend
to quote.
(cid:3)
Check your notes for accuracy againstthe original material before
moving on to another source.
*Peter Walsh, in How to Organize Just About Everything (New York: Free Press,
2004), points out that index cards, despite their image, are often best for organizing a
writing task.

=== Page 382 ===
6860ch0N.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:53 AM Page 349
nouns 349
nouns
DIRECTORY
Types of Nouns 349 Collective Nouns 350
Noun Functions 349 Plural Nouns 350
A noun is a partof speech that names a person, place, thing, concept,
action, or quality.
Types of Nouns
The two basic types of nouns are proper nouns and common nouns.
Proper nouns, which are capitalized, name specific people, places, and
things (H. G. Wells, Boston, United Nations, Nobel Prize). See also cap-
italization.
Common nouns, which are not capitalized unless they begin sen-
tences, name general classes or categories of persons, places, things,
concepts, actions, and qualities (writer, city, organization, award).
Common nouns include collective nouns, concrete nouns, abstract
nouns, count nouns, and mass nouns.
Collective nounsare common nouns that indicate a group or collec-
tion. They are plural in meaning but singular in form (audience, jury,
brigade, staff, committee). (See the subsection Collective Nouns on page
350 for advice on using singular or plural forms with collective nouns.)
N
Concrete nounsare common nouns used to identify those things that
can be discerned by the five senses (paper, keyboard, glue, nail, grease).
Abstract nouns are common nouns that name ideas, qualities, or
concepts that cannot be discerned by the five senses (loyalty, pride,
valor, peace, devotion).
Count nouns are concrete nouns that identify things that can be
separated into countable units (desks, envelopes, printers, pencils,
books).
Mass nouns are concrete nouns that identify things that cannot be
separated into countable units (water, air, electricity, oil, cement). See
also English as a second language.
Noun Functions
Nouns function as subjects of verbs, direct and indirect objects of verbs
and prepositions, subjective and objective complements, or appositives
(shown below).
(cid:2) The metalfailed during the test. [subject]
(cid:2) The bricklayer cemented the blocksefficiently.
[direct object of a verb]

=== Page 383 ===
6860ch0N.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:53 AM Page 350
350 nouns
(cid:2) The state presented our departmenta safety award.
[indirect object]
(cid:2) The event occurred within the year. [object of a preposition]
(cid:2) A dynamo is a generator. [subjective complement]
(cid:2) The regional manager was appointed chairperson.
[objective complement]
(cid:2) Philip Garcia, the treasurer, gave his report last. [appositive]
Words normally used as nouns can also be used as adjectives and
adverbs.
(cid:2) It is companypolicy. [adjective]
(cid:2) He went home. [adverb]
Collective Nouns
When a collective noun refers to a group as a whole, it takes a singular
verb and pronoun.
(cid:2) The staff wasdivided on the issue and could not reach itsdecision
until May 15.
When a collective noun refers to individuals within a group, it takes a
plural verb and pronoun.
N
(cid:2) The staff returnedto theiroffices after the conference.
A better way to emphasize the individuals on the staff would be to use
the phrase the staff members.
(cid:2) The staff members returnedto theiroffices after the conference.
Treat organization names and titles as singular.
(cid:2) LRM Associates hasgrown 30 percent in the last three years;
itwill move to a new facility in January.
Plural Nouns
Most nouns form the plural by adding -s (dolphin/dolphins, pencil/pen-
cils). Nouns ending in ch, s, sh, x, and zform the plural by adding -es.
(cid:2) search/searches, glass/glasses, wish/wishes, six/sixes, buzz/buzzes
Nouns that end in a consonant plus yform the plural by changing the y
to -ies(delivery/deliveries). Some nouns ending in oadd -esto form the
plural, but others add only -s (tomato/tomatoes, dynamo/dynamos).

=== Page 384 ===
6860ch0N.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:53 AM Page 351
number (grammar) 351
Some nouns ending in f or fe add -s to form the plural; others change
the for feto ves.
(cid:2) cliff/cliffs, fife/fifes, hoof/hooves, knife/knives
Some nouns require an internal change to form the plural.
(cid:2) woman/women, man/men, mouse/mice, goose/geese
Some nouns do not change in the plural form.
(cid:2) many fish, several deer, fifty sheep
Some nouns remain in the plural form whether singular or plural.
(cid:2) headquarters, means, series, crossroads
Hyphenated and open compound nouns form the plural in the main
word.
(cid:2) sons-in-law, high schools, editors in chief
Compound nouns written as one word add -s to the end (two table-
spoonfuls).
If you are unsure of the proper usage, check a dictionary. See pos-
sessive casefor a discussion of how nouns form possessives.
N
number (grammar)
Number is the grammatical property of nouns, pronouns, and verbs
that signifies whether one thing (singular) or more than one (plural) is
being referred to. (See also agreement.) Nouns normally form the plural
by simply adding -sor -esto their singular forms.
(cid:2) Partnersin successful businessesare not always personal friends.
Some nouns require an internal change to form the plural.
(cid:2) woman/women, man/men, goose/geese, mouse/mice
All pronouns except youchange internally to form the plural.
(cid:2) I/we, he/they, she/they, it/they
By adding -s or -es, most verbs show the singular of the third person,
present tense, indicative mood.
(cid:2) he stands, she works, it goes

=== Page 385 ===
6860ch0N.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:53 AM Page 352
352 numbers
The verb benormally changes form to indicate the plural.
SINGULAR I amready to begin work.
PLURAL We areready to begin work.
See also agreement.
numbers
DIRECTORY
Numerals or Words 352 Time 354
Plurals 353 Dates 354
Measurements 353 Addresses 354
Fractions 353 Documents 355
Money 353
The standards for using numbers vary; however, unless you are follow-
ing an organizational or a professional style manual, observe the fol-
lowing guidelines.
Numerals or Words
N Write numbers from zero through ten as words, and write numbers
above ten as numerals.
(cid:2) I rehearsed my presentation threetimes.
(cid:2) The association added 150new members.
Spell out numbers that begin a sentence, however, even if they would
otherwise be written as numerals.
(cid:2) One hundred and fiftynew members joined the association.
If spelling out such a number seems awkward, rewrite the sentence so
that the number does not appear at the beginning (“We added 150new
members”).
Spell out approximate and round numbers.
(cid:2) We’ve had over a thousandrequests this month.
In most writing, spell out small ordinal numbers, which express degree
or sequence (first, second; but 27th, 42nd), when they are single words
(our nineteenth year), or when they modify a century (the twenty-first

=== Page 386 ===
6860ch0N.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:53 AM Page 353
numbers 353
century). However, avoid ordinal numbers in dates (use March 30 or
30 March, not March 30th).
Plurals
Indicate the plural of numerals by adding -s (7s, the late 1990s). Form
the plural of a written number (like any noun) by adding -sor -esor by
dropping the y and adding -ies (elevens, sixes, twenties). See also apos-
trophes.
Measurements
Express units of measurement as numerals (3 miles, 45 cubic feet, 9 me-
ters). When numbers run together in the same phrase, write one as a
numeral and the other as a word.
twelve
(cid:2) The order was for 126-foot tables.
^
Generally give percentages as numerals and write out the word percent.
(Approximately 85 percent of the land has been sold.) However, in a
table, use a numeral followed by the percent symbol (85%).
Fractions
Express fractions as numerals when they are written with whole num-
bers (271⁄2 inches, 41⁄4 miles). Spell out fractions when they are ex-
N
pressed without a whole number (one-fourth, seven-eighths). Always
write decimal numbers as numerals (5.21 meters).
Money
In general, use numerals to express exact or approximate amounts of
money.
(cid:2) We need to charge $28.95per unit.
(cid:2) The new system costs $60,000.
Use words to express indefinite amounts of money.
(cid:2) The printing system may cost several thousand dollars.
Use numerals and words for rounded amounts of money over one mil-
lion dollars.
(cid:2) The contract is worth $6.8 million.
Use numerals for more complex or exact amounts.

=== Page 387 ===
6860ch0N.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:53 AM Page 354
354 numbers
(cid:2) The corporation paid $2,452,500in taxes last year.
For amounts under a dollar, ordinarily use numerals and the word cents
(“The pens cost 50 cents each”), unless other numerals that require dol-
lar signs appear in the same sentence.
(cid:2) The business-card holders cost $10.49each, the pens cost $.50
each, and the pencil-cup holders cost $6.49each.
ESL TIPSfor Punctuating Numbers
Some rules for punctuating numbers in English are summarized as
follows.
Use a comma to separate numbers with four or more digits into groups
of three,starting from the right(5,289,112,001atoms).
Do not use a comma in years, house numbers, ZIP Codes, and page
numbers.
(cid:2) June 2009
(cid:2) 92401East Alameda Drive
(cid:2) The ZIPCode is 91601.
(cid:2) Page 1204
Use a period to represent the decimal point (4.2 percent,
$3,742,097.43).See also global communicationand global graphics.
N
Time
Divide hours and minutes with colons when a.m. or p.m. follows (7:30
a.m., 11:30 p.m.). Do not use colons with the 24-hour system (0730,
2330). Spelled-out time is not followed by a.m. or p.m. (seven o’clock
in the evening).
Dates
In the United States dates are usually written in a month-day-year se-
quence (August 11, 2009). Never use the strictly numerical form for
dates (8/11/09) because the date is not immediately clear, especially in
international correspondence.
Addresses
Spell out numbered streets from one to ten unless space is at a premium
(East Tenth Street). Write building numbers as numerals. The only ex-

=== Page 388 ===
6860ch0N.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:53 AM Page 355
numbers 355
ception is the building number one(One East Monument Street). Write
highway numbers as numerals (U.S. 40, Ohio 271, I-94).
Documents
Page numbers are written as numerals in manuscripts (page 37). Chap-
ter and volume numbers may appear as numerals or words (Chapter 2
or Chapter Two, Volume 1 or Volume One), but be consistent. Express
figure and table numbers as numerals (Figure 4, Table 3).
Do not follow a word representing a number with a numeral in
parentheses that represents the same number. Doing so is redundant.
(cid:2) Send five (5)copies of the report.
N

=== Page 389 ===
6860ch0O.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:53 AM Page 356
O
objects
Objects are nouns or noun equivalents: pronouns, verbals, and noun
phrases or clauses. (See also complements and verbs.) The three kinds
of objects are direct objects, indirect objects, and objects of preposi-
tions.
A direct objectanswers the question what?or whom?about a verb
and its subject.
(cid:2) We sent a full report. [We sent what?]
(cid:2) Michelle e-mailed the client. [Michelle e-mailed whom?]
An indirect object is a noun or noun equivalent that occurs with a di-
rect object after certain kinds of transitive verbs, such as give, wish,
cause, and tell. The indirect object answers the question to whom or
what? or for whom or what?The indirect object always precedes the di-
rect object.
(cid:2) We sent the general managera full report.
O
[Reportis the direct object; the indirect object, general manager,
answers the question, “We sent a full report to whom?”]
The object of a prepositionis a noun or pronoun that is introduced by a
preposition, forming a prepositional phrase.
(cid:2) At the meeting, the district managers approved the contract.
[Meetingis the object, and at the meetingis the prepositional
phrase.]
OK / okay
The expression okay (also spelled OK) is common in informal writing,
but it should be avoided in most technical writing.
approved
(cid:2) Mr. Sturgess gave his okay tothe project.
^
356

=== Page 390 ===
6860ch0O.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:53 AM Page 357
one of those...who 357
on / onto / upon
On is normally used as a preposition meaning “attached to” or “lo-
cated at.” (“Install the shelf onthe north wall.”) Onalso stresses a posi-
tion of rest. (“The patient lay onthe stretcher.”) Ontoimplies movement
to a position on or movement up and on. (“The commuters surged onto
the platform.”) Uponemphasizes movement or a condition. (“The report
is due uponcompletion of the project.”)
one
When used as an indefinite pronoun, onemay help you avoid repeating
a noun. (“We need a new plan, not an old one.”) Oneis often redundant
in phrases in which it restates the noun, and it may take the proper em-
phasis away from the adjective.
unique.
(cid:2) The training program was not a unique one.
^
One can also be used in place of a noun or personal pronoun in a
statement. (“Onecannot ignore one’sphysical condition.”) Using onein
that way is formal and impersonal; in any but the most formal writing,
you should address your reader directly and personally as you. (“You
cannot ignore yourphysical condition.”) See also pointof view.
O
one of those . . . who
A dependent clausebeginning with whoor thatand preceded by one of
thosetakes a plural verb.
(cid:2) She is one of thosemanagers who areconcerned about their
writing.
(cid:2) This is one of thosepolicies that makeno sense when you examine
them closely.
In those two examples, who and that refer to plural antecedents (man-
agers and policies) and thus take plural verbs (are and make). See also
agreement.
If the phrase one of those is preceded by the only, however, the
verb should be singular.

=== Page 391 ===
6860ch0O.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:53 AM Page 358
358 only
(cid:2) She is the only one of thosemanagers who isconcerned about her
writing.
[The verb is singular because its subject, who, refers to a singular
antecedent, one. If the sentence were reversed, it would read, “Of
those managers, she is the only one who isconcerned about her
writing.”]
(cid:2) This is the only one of thosepolicies that makesno sense when
you examine it closely.
[If the sentence were reversed, it would read, “Of those policies,
this is the only one that makesno sense when you examine it
closely.”]
only
The word onlyshould be placed immediately before the word or phrase
it modifies. See also modifiers.
only
(cid:2) We onlylackfinancial backing.
^
Be careful with the placement of only because it can change the mean-
ing of a sentence.
(cid:2) Onlyhe said that he was tired.
[He alone said that he was tired.]
O
(cid:2) He onlysaid that he was tired.
[He actually was not tired, although he said he was.]
(cid:2) He said onlythat he was tired.
[He said nothing except that he was tired.]
(cid:2) He said that he was onlytired.
[He said that he was nothing except tired.]
order-of-importance method of development
The order-of-importance method of developmentis a particularly effec-
tive and common organizing strategy. This method can use one of two
ordering strategies—decreasing order (Figure O–1), which is often best
for written documents, and increasing order (Figure O–2), which is es-
pecially effective for oral presentations.

=== Page 392 ===
6860ch0O.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:53 AM Page 359
order-of-importance method of development 359
Memorandum
To: Tawana Shaw, Director, Human Resources Department
From: Frank W. Nemitz, Chief, Product Marketing
FWN
Date: November 20, 2009
Subject: Selection of Manager of the Technical Writing Department
I have assessed the candidates for Manager of the Technical Writing
Department as you requested, and the following are my evaluations.
Top-Ranked Candidate
The most qualified candidate is Michelle Bryant, acting manager of
the department. In her 12 years in the department, Ms. Bryant has
gained wide experience in all facets of its operations. She has main-
tained a consistently high production record and has demonstrated
the skills and knowledge required for the supervisory duties she is
now handling. She has continually been rated “outstanding” in all
categories in her job-performance appraisals. However, her super-
visory experience is limited to her present three-month tenure as
acting manager of the department, and she lacks the college degree
required by the job description.
Second-Ranked Candidate
Michael Bastick, Graphics Coordinator, my second choice, also
has strong potential for the position. An able administrator, he has
been with the company for seven years. Further, he is enrolled in a
management-training course at Metro State University’s downtown
campus. I have ranked him second because he lacks supervisory ex-
perience and because his most recent work as a technical writer has O
been limited.
Third-Ranked Candidate
Jane Fine, my third-ranked candidate, has shown herself to be
an exceptionally skilled writer in her three years with the Public
Relations Department. Despite her obvious potential, she does not
yet have the breadth of experience in technical writing that is re-
quired to manage the Technical Writing Department. Jane Fine
also lacks on-the-job supervisory experience.
FIGUREO–1. Decreasing Order-of-Importance Method of Development

=== Page 393 ===
6860ch0O.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:53 AM Page 360
360 order-of-importance method of development
To: Sun-Hee Kim <kim@appliedsciences.com>
From: Harry Mathews
<mathews@appliedsciences.com>
Sent: Friday,May 22,2009 9:29 AM
Subject: Recruiting Qualified Electronics Technicians
As our company continues to expand,and with the planned
opening of the Lakeland Facility late nextyear,we need to
increase and refocus our recruiting program to keep our com-
pany staffed with qualified electronics technicians.Below is
my analysis of possible recruiting options.
Technical School Recruitment
Over the pastthree years,we have relied on our in-house in-
ternship program and on local and regional technical school
graduates to fill these positions.Although our in-house in-
ternship program provides a qualified pool of employees,
technical school enrollments in the area have in the pastpro-
vided candidates who are already trained.Each year,however,
fewer technical school graduates are being produced,and
even the mostvigorous Career Day recruiting has yielded
disappointing results.
Military Veteran Recruitment
In the past,we relied heavily on the recruitmentof skilled
veterans from all branches of the military.This source of qual-
ified applicants all butdisappeared when the military offered
attractive reenlistmentbonuses for skilled technicians in
O
uniform.As a result,we need to become aggressive in our
attempts to reach this group through advertising.I would
like to meetwith you soon to discuss the details of a more
dynamic recruiting program for skilled technicians leaving
the military.
I am certain thatwith the rightrecruitmentcampaign,we
can find the skilled employees essential to our expanding role
in electronics products and consulting.
FIGUREO–2. Increasing Order-of-Importance Method of Development

=== Page 394 ===
6860ch0O.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:53 AM Page 361
organization 361
Decreasing Order
Decreasing order begins with the most important fact or point, then
moves to the next most important, and so on, ending with the least im-
portant. This order is especially appropriate for a memoor other corre-
spondence addressed to a busy decision-maker (see Figure O–1), who
may be able to reach a decision after considering only the most impor-
tant points. In a report addressed to various readers, some of whom
may be interested in only the major points and others who may need all
the information, decreasing order may be ideal for your purpose.
The advantages of decreasing order are that (1) it gets the reader’s
attention immediately by presenting the most important point first,
(2) it makes a strong initial impression, and (3) it ensures that even the
most hurried reader will not miss the most important point.
Increasing Order
Increasing order begins from the least important point or fact, then pro-
gresses to the next more important, and builds finally to the most im-
portant or strongest point.
Increasing order of importance is effective for writing in which
(1) you want to save your strongest points until the end or (2) you need
to build the ideas point by point to an important conclusion (see Fig-
ure O–2). Many oral presentations benefit especially from increasing
order because it leaves the audiencewith the strongest points freshest in
their minds. The disadvantage of increasing order, especially for written
documents, is that it begins weakly, and the reader or listener may be-
O
come impatient or distracted before reaching your main point. In the
example given in Figure O–2, the writer begins with the least produc-
tive source of applicants and builds up to the most productive source.
organization
Organization is essential to the success of any writing project, from a
formal report to a Web design or an effective presentation. Good orga-
nization is achieved by outlining and by using a logical and an appro-
priate method of development that suits your subject, your audience,
and your purpose.
During the organization stage of the writing process, you must con-
sider a layoutand design that will be helpful to your reader and a for-
mat appropriate to your subject and purpose. If you intend to include
visuals with your writing, consider them as you create your outline,

=== Page 395 ===
6860ch0O.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:53 AM Page 362
362 organizational charts
especially if they need to be prepared by someone else while you are
writing and revising the draft. See also “Five Steps to Successful Writing.”
organizational charts
An organizational chart shows how the various components of an orga-
nization are related to one another. This type of visual is useful when
you want to give readers an overview of an organization or to display
the lines of authority within it, as in Figure O–3.
The title of each organizational component (office, section, divi-
sion) is placed in a separate box. The boxes are then linked to a central
authority. If readers need the information, include the name of the per-
son and position title in each box.
As with all visuals, place the organizational chart as close as pos-
sible to but not preceding the text that refers to it.
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION
CENTER FOR DRUG EVALUATION AND RESEARCH
OFFICE OF PHARMACEUTICAL SCIENCE
OFFICE OF GENERIC DRUGS
OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR
DIRECTOR
Gary J. Buehler
(DBNSB)
O
DIVISION OF DIVISION OF
BIOEQUIVALENCE CHEMISTRY I
DIRECTOR DIRECTOR
Dale P. Conner, Pharm.D. Rashmikant Patel, Ph.D.
(DBNSBA) (DBNSBB)
DIVISION OF DIVISION OF DIVISION OF
CHEMISTRY II LABELING AND PROGRAM CHEMISTRY III
SUPPORT
DIRECTOR DIRECTOR DIRECTOR
Florence S. Fang W. Peter Rickman Vilayet Sayeed, Ph.D.
(DBNSBC) (DBNSBD) (DBNSBE)
FIGUREO–3. Organizational Chart
outlining
An outline is the skeleton of the document you are going to write; at the
least, it should list the main topics and subtopics of your subject in a
logical method of development.

=== Page 396 ===
6860ch0O.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:53 AM Page 363
outlining 363
Advantages of Outlining
An outline provides structure to your writing by ensuring that it has a
beginning (introduction), a middle (main body), and an end (conclu-
sion). Using an outline offers many other benefits.
• Larger and more complex subjects are easier to handle because an
outline breaks them into manageable parts.
• Like a road map, an outline indicates a starting point and keeps
you moving logically so that you do not lose your way before you
arrive at your conclusion.
• Parts of an outline are easily moved around so that you can select
the most effective arrangement of your ideas.
• Creating a good outline frees you from concerns of organization
while you are writing a draft.
• An outline enables you to provide coherenceand transitionso that
one part flows smoothly into the next without omitting important
details.
• Logic errorsare much easier to detect and correct in an outline than
in a draft.
• An outline helps with collaborative writingbecause it enables a
team to refine a project’s scope, divide responsibilities, and main-
tain focus.
Types of Outlines
Two types of outlines are most common: short topic outlines and O
lengthy sentence outlines. A topic outline consists of short phrases
arranged to reflect your primary method of development. A topic out-
line is especially useful for short documents such as e-mails, letters, or
memos. See also correspondence.
For a large writing project, create a topic outline first, and then use
it as a basis for creating a sentence outline. A sentence outline summa-
rizes each idea in a complete sentence that may become the topic sen-
tence for a paragraph in the rough draft. If most of your notes can be
shaped into topic sentences for paragraphs in your rough draft, you can
be relatively sure that your document will be well organized. See also
note-takingand research.
Creating an Outline
When you are outlining large and complex subjects with many pieces of
information, the first step is to group related notes into categories. Sort
the notes by major and minor division headings. Use an appropriate
method of development to arrange items and label them with Roman

=== Page 397 ===
6860ch0O.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:53 AM Page 364
364 outlining
numerals. For example, the major divisions for this discussion of outlin-
ing could be as follows:
I. Advantages of outlining
II. Types of outlines
III. Creating an outline
The second step is to establish your minor divisions within each major
division. Arrange your minor points using a method of development
under their major division and label them with capital letters.
II. Types of outlines
A. Topic outlines ⎤ ⎥
B. Sentence outlines ⎦ Division and Classification
III. Creating an outline
A. Establish major and minor divisions. ⎤
⎥
B. Sort notes by major and minor divisions. ⎥ Sequential
⎥
C. Complete the sentence outline. ⎦
You will sometimes need more than two levels of headings. If your sub-
ject is complicated, you may need three or four levels of headings to
better organize all of your ideas in proper relationship to one another.
In that event, use the following numbering scheme:
I. First-level heading
A. Second-level heading
O 1. Third-level heading
a. Fourth-level heading
The third step is to mark each of your notes with the appropriate
Roman numeral and capital letter. Arrange the notes logically within
each minor heading, and mark each with the appropriate, sequential
Arabic number. As you do, make sure your organization is logical and
your headings have parallel structure. For example, all the second-level
headings under “III. Creating an outline” are complete sentences in the
active voice.
Treat visuals as an integral part of your outline, and plan approxi-
mately where each should appear. Either include a rough sketch of the
visual or write “illustration of...” at each place. As with other infor-
mation in an outline, freely move, delete, or add visuals as needed.
The outline samples shown earlier use a combination of numbers
and letters to differentiate the various levels of information. You could
also use a decimal numbering system, such as the following, for your
outline.

=== Page 398 ===
6860ch0O.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:53 AM Page 365
outside [of] 365
1. FIRST-LEVEL HEADING
1.1 Second-level heading
1.2 Second-level heading
1.2.1 Third-level heading
1.2.2 Third-level heading
1.2.2.1 Fourth-level heading
1.2.2.2 Fourth-level heading
1.3 Second-level heading
2. FIRST-LEVEL HEADING
This system should not go beyond the fourth level because the numbers
get too cumbersome beyond that point. In many documents, such as
manuals, the decimal numbering system is carried over from the outline
to the final version of the document for ease of cross-referencing sec-
tions.
Create your draft by converting your notes into complete sentences
and paragraphs. If you have a sentence outline, the most difficult part
of the writing job is over. However, whether you have a topic or a sen-
tence outline, remember that an outline is flexible; it may need to
change as you write the draft, but it should always be your point of de-
parture and return.
DIGITAL TIP
Creating an Outline
Using the outline feature of your word-processing software allows
you to format your outline automatically—fill in, rearrange, and O
update your outline, as well as create an alphanumeric or a deci-
mal numbering outlining style. For step-by-step instructions, see
bedfordstmartins.com/alredtech and select Digital Tips, “Creating an
Outline.”
outside [of ]
In the phrase outside of, the word ofis redundant.
(cid:2) Place the rack outside ofthe incubator.
Do not use outside ofto mean “aside from” or “except for.”
Except for
(cid:2) Outside ofhis frequent absences, Jim has a good work record.
^

=== Page 399 ===
6860ch0O.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:53 AM Page 366
366 over [with]
over [with]
In the expression over with, the word withis redundant; such words as
completedor finishedoften better express the thought.
.
(cid:2) You may open the test chamber when the experiment is overwith.
^
completed.
(cid:2) You may open the test chamber when the experiment is over with.
^
O

=== Page 400 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 367
P
pace
Pace is the speed at which you present ideas to the reader. Your goal
should be to achieve a pace that fits your audience, purpose, and con-
text. The more knowledgeable the reader is about the subject, the faster
your pace can be. Be careful, though, not to lose control of the pace. In
the first version of the following passage, facts are piled on top of each
other at a rapid pace. In the second version, the same facts are pre-
sented in two more easily assimilated sentences. In addition, the second
version achieves a different and more desirable emphasis.
RAPID The hospital’s generator produces 110 volts at
60 hertz and is powered by a 90-horsepower en-
gine. It is designed to operate under normal
conditions of temperature and humidity, for use
under emergency conditions, and may be phased
with other units of the same type to produce ad-
ditional power when needed.
P
CONTROLLED The hospital’s generator, which is powered by a
90-horsepower engine, produces 110 volts at
60 hertz under normal conditions of temperature
and humidity. Designed especially for use under
emergency conditions, this generator may be phased
with other units of the same type to produce addi-
tional power when needed.
paragraphs
A paragraph performs three functions: (1) It develops the unit of
thought stated in the topic sentence; (2) it provides a logical break in
the material; and (3) it creates a visual break on the page, which signals
a new topic.
367

=== Page 401 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 368
368 paragraphs
Topic Sentence
A topic sentence states the paragraph’s main idea; the rest of the para-
graph supports and develops that statement with related details. The
topic sentence is often the first sentence because it tells the reader what
the paragraph is about.
(cid:2) The arithmetic of searching for oil is stark. For all the scientific
methods of detection, the only way the oil driller can actually
know for sure that there is oil in the ground is to drill a well.
The average cost of drilling an oil well is at least $2,000,000
and drilling a single well may cost over $18,000,000. And once
the well is drilled, the odds against its containing any oil at all
are eight to one!
The topic sentence is usually most effective early in the paragraph, but a
paragraph can lead to the topic sentence, which is sometimes done to
achieve emphasis.
(cid:2) Energy does far more than simply make our daily lives more
comfortable and convenient. Suppose you wanted to stop—and
reverse—the economic progress of this nation. What would be the
surest and quickest way to do it? Find a way to cut off the nation’s
oil resources! The economy would plummet into the abyss of na-
tional economic ruin. Our economy, in short, is energy-based.
—The Baker World(Los Angeles: Baker Oil Tools)
On rare occasions, the topic sentence may logically fall in the middle of
a paragraph.
P (cid:2) ...[It] is time to insist that science does not progress by carefully
designed steps called “experiments,” each of which has a well-
defined beginning and end. Science is a continuous and often a
disorderly and accidental process. We shall not do the young psy-
chologist any favor if we agree to reconstruct our practices to fit
the pattern demanded by current scientific methodology.
—B. F. Skinner, “A Case History in Scientific Method”
Paragraph Length
A paragraph should be just long enough to deal adequately with the
subject of its topic sentence. A new paragraph should begin whenever
the subject changes significantly. A series of short, undeveloped para-
graphs can indicate poor organizationand sacrifice unity by breaking a
single idea into several pieces. A series of long paragraphs, however, can
fail to provide the reader with manageable subdivisions of thought.
Paragraph length should aid the reader’s understanding of ideas.

=== Page 402 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 369
paragraphs 369
Occasionally, a one-sentence paragraph is acceptable if it is used as
a transition between longer paragraphs or as a one-sentence introduc-
tionor conclusionin correspondence.
Writing Paragraphs
Careful paragraphing reflects the writer’s logical organization and helps
the reader follow the writer’s thoughts. A good working outline makes
it easy to group ideas into appropriate paragraphs. (See also outlining.)
The following partial topic outline plots the course of the subsequent
paragraphs:
TOPIC OUTLINE (PARTIAL)
I. Advantages of Chicago as location for new facility
A. Transport infrastructure
1. Rail
2. Air
3. Truck
4. Sea (except in winter)
B. Labor supply
1. Engineering and scientific personnel
a. Similar companies in area
b. Major universities
2. Technical and manufacturing personnel
a. Community college programs
b. Custom programs
RESULTING PARAGRAPHS
Probably the greatest advantage of Chicago as a location for our
new facility is its excellent transport facilities. The city is served by P
three major railroads. Both domestic and international air-cargo
service are available at O’Hare International Airport; Midway Air-
port’s convenient location adds flexibility for domestic air-cargo
service. Chicago is a major hub of the trucking industry, and most
of the nation’s large freight carriers have terminals there. Finally,
except in the winter months when the Great Lakes are frozen,
Chicago is a seaport, accessible through the St. Lawrence Seaway.
Chicago’s second advantage is its abundant labor force. An
ample supply of engineering and scientific staff is assured not only
by the presence of many companies engaged in activities similar to
ours but also by the presence of several major universities in the
metropolitan area. Similarly, technicians and manufacturing per-
sonnel are in abundant supply. The colleges in the Chicago City
College system, as well as half a dozen other two-year colleges in
the outlying areas, produce graduates with associate’s degrees in
a wide variety of technical specialties appropriate to our needs.

=== Page 403 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 370
370 parallel structure
Moreover, three of the outlying colleges have expressed an interest
in developing off-campus courses attuned specifically to our re-
quirements.
Paragraph Unity and Coherence
A good paragraph has unityand coherenceas well as adequate develop-
ment. Unity is singleness of purpose, based on a topic sentence that
states the core idea of the paragraph. When every sentence in the para-
graph develops the core idea, the paragraph has unity. Coherence is
holding to one point of view, one attitude, one tense; it is the joining of
sentences into a logical pattern. A careful choice of transitional words
ties ideas together and thus contributes to coherence in a paragraph.
Notice how the boldfaced italicized words tie together the ideas in the
following paragraph.
TOPIC Over the past several months, I have heard complaints
SENTENCE about the Merit Award Program. Specifically, many
employees feel that this program should be linked to
annual salary increases. They believe that salary in-
creaseswould provide a much better incentive than
the current $500 to $700 cash awards for exceptional
service. In addition, these employees believethat their
supervisors consider the cash awards a satisfactory al-
ternative to salary increases. Although I don’t think
this practice is widespread, the fact that the employees
believethat it is justifies a reevaluation of the Merit
Award Program.
Simple enumeration (first, second, then, next, and so on) also provides
P
effective transition within paragraphs. Notice how the boldfaced itali-
cized words and phrases give coherence to the following paragraph.
(cid:2) Most adjustable office chairs have nylon tubes that hold metal
spindle rods. To keep the chair operational, lubricate the spindle
rods occasionally. First,loosen the set screw in the adjustable bell.
Thenlift the chair from the base. Next, apply the lubricant to the
spindle rod and the nylon washer. When you have finished, replace
the chair and tighten the set screw.
parallel structure
Parallel structure requires that sentence elements that are alike in func-
tion be alike in grammatical form as well. This structure achieves an
economy of words, clarifies meaning, expresses the equality of the

=== Page 404 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 371
parallel structure 371
ideas, and achieves emphasis. Parallel structure assists readers because
it allows them to anticipate the meaning of a sentence element on the
basis of its construction.
Parallel structure can be achieved with words, phrases, or clauses.
(cid:2) If you want to benefit from the jobs training program, you must be
punctual, courteous, and conscientious. [parallel words]
(cid:2) If you want to benefit from the jobs training program, you must
recognize the importance ofpunctuality, of courtesy, and of con-
scientiousness. [parallel phrases]
(cid:2) If you want to benefit from the jobs training program, you must
arrive punctually, you must behave courteously, and you must
study conscientiously. [parallel clauses]
Correlative conjunctions(either...or, neither...nor, not only...
but also) should always join elements that use parallel structure. Both
parts of the pairs should be followed immediately by the same gram-
matical form: two similar words, two similar phrases, or two similar
clauses.
(cid:2) Viruses carry either DNAor RNA, never both. [parallel words]
(cid:2) Clearly, neither serological testsnor virus isolation studiesalone
would have been adequate. [parallel phrases]
(cid:2) Either we must increase our production efficiencyor we must de-
crease our production goals. [parallel clauses]
To make a parallel construction clear and effective, it is often best
to repeat an article, a pronoun, a helping verb, a preposition, a subordi-
P
nating conjunction, or the mark of an infinitive (to).
(cid:2) The association has amission statement and acode of ethics.
(cid:2) The driver mustcheck the gauge regularly and mustact quickly
when the indicator falls below the red line.
Parallel structure is especially important in creating lists, outlines, ta-
bles of contents, and headings because it lets readers know the relative
value of each item in a table of contents and each heading in the body
of a document. See also outlining.
Faulty Parallelism
Faulty parallelism results when joined elements are intended to serve
equal grammatical functions but do not have equal grammatical form.
Faulty parallelism sometimes occurs because a writer tries to com-
pare items that are not comparable.

=== Page 405 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 372
372 paraphrasing
NOT PARALLEL The company offers special college training to help
nonexempt employees move into professional
careers like engineering management, software de-
velopment, service technicians, and sales trainees.
[Notice faulty comparison of occupations—engi-
neering managementand software development—
to people—service techniciansand sales trainees.]
To avoid faulty parallelism, make certain that each element in a series is
similar in form and structure to all others in the same series.
PARALLEL The company offers special college training to help
nonexempt employees move into professional ca-
reers like engineering management, software
development, technical services, and sales.
paraphrasing
Paraphrasing is restating or rewriting in your own words the essential
ideas of another writer. The following example is an original passage
explaining the concept of object blur. The paraphrased version restates
the essential information of the passage in a form appropriate for a
report.
ORIGINAL One of the major visual cues used by pilots in
maintaining precision ground reference during low-
level flight is that of object blur. We are acquainted
P with the object-blur phenomenon experienced
when driving an automobile. Objects in the fore-
ground appear to be rushing toward us, while
objects in the background appear to recede
slightly.
—Wesley E. Woodson and Donald W. Conover,
Human Engineering Guide for Equipment Designers
PARAPHRASED Object blur refers to the phenomenon by which ob-
servers in a moving vehicle report that foreground
objects appear to rush at them, while background
objects appear to recede slightly (Woodson &
Conover, 1964).
ETHICS NOTE Because paraphrasing does not quote a source word for
word, quotation marks are not used. However, paraphrased material
should be credited because the ideas are taken from someone else. See
also ethics in writing, note-taking, plagiarism, and quotations. ✦

=== Page 406 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 373
parentheses 373
parentheses
Parentheses are used to enclose explanatory or digressive words, phrases,
or sentences. Material in parentheses often clarifies or defines the pre-
ceding text without altering its meaning.
(cid:2) She severely bruised her tibia (or shinbone) in the accident.
Parenthetical information may not be essential to a sentence (in fact,
parentheses deemphasize the enclosed material), but it may be helpful
to some readers.
Parenthetical material does not affect the punctuation of a sen-
tence, and any punctuation (such as a commaor period) should appear
following the closing parenthesis.
(cid:2) She could not fully extend her knee because of a torn meniscus (or
cartilage), and she suffered pain from a severely bruised tibia (or
shinbone).
When a complete sentence within parentheses stands independently, the
ending punctuation is placed inside the final parenthesis.
(cid:2) The project director listed the problems her staff faced. (This was
the third time she had complained to the board.)
For some constructions, however, you should consider using subordina-
tionrather than parentheses.
, which pleased the attending
(cid:2) The early tests showed little damage(the attending physician was
physician, ^
pleased),but later scans revealed abdominal trauma.
P
Parentheses also are used to enclose numerals or letters that indicate se-
quence.
(cid:2) The following sections deal with (1) preparation, (2) research,
(3) organization, (4) writing, and (5) revision.
Do not follow spelled-out numberswith numerals in parentheses repre-
senting the same numbers.
(cid:2) Send five (5)copies of the report.
Use bracketsto set off a parenthetical item that is already within paren-
theses.
(cid:2) We should be sure to give Emanuel Foose (and his brother Emilio
[1912–1982]) credit for his part in founding the institute.
See also documenting sourcesand quotations.

=== Page 407 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 374
374 parts of speech
parts of speech
The term parts of speechdescribes the class of words to which a partic-
ular word belongs, according to its function in a sentence.
PART OF SPEECH FUNCTION
noun,pronoun naming/referring
verb acting/asserting
adjective,adverb describing/modifying
conjunction,preposition joining/linking
interjection exclaiming
Many words can function as more than one part of speech. See also
functional shift.
party
In legal language, partyrefers to an individual, a group, or an organiza-
tion. (“The injured partysued my client.”) The term is inappropriate in
all but legal writing; when you are referring to a person, use the word
person.
person
(cid:2) The partywhose file you requested is here now.
^
Partyis, of course, appropriate when it refers to a group. (“Jim arranged
a tour of the facility for the members of our party.”)
P
per
When per is used to mean “for each,” “by means of,” “through,” or
“on account of,” it is appropriate (perannum, percapita, perdiem, per
head). When used to mean “according to” (per your request, per your
order), the expression is jargonand should be avoided.
we discussed,
(cid:2) As per our discussion,I will send revised instructions.
^
percent / percentage
Percent is normally used instead of the symbol % (“only 15 percent”),
except in tables, where space is at a premium. Percentage, which is never
used with numbers, indicates a general size (“only a small percentage”).

=== Page 408 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 375
periods 375
periods
A period is a mark of punctuation that usually indicates the end of a
declarative or an imperative sentence. Periods also link when used as
leaders (as in rows of periods in tables of contents) and indicate omis-
sions when used as ellipses. Periods are also used to end questions that
are actually polite requests, or instructions to which an affirmative re-
sponse is assumed. (“Will you call me as soon as he arrives.”) See also
sentence construction.
Periods in Quotations
Use a comma, not a period, after a declarative sentence that is quoted in
the context of another sentence.
(cid:2) “There is every chance of success,” she stated.
A period is placed inside quotation marks. See also quotations.
(cid:2) He stated clearly, “My vote is yes.”
Periods with Parentheses
Place a period outside the final parenthesis when a parenthetical ele-
ment ends a sentence.
(cid:2) The institute was founded by Harry Denman (1902–1972).
Place a period inside the final parenthesis when a complete sentence
stands independently within parentheses. P
(cid:2) The project director listed the problems her staff faced. (This was
the third time she had complained to the board.)
Other Uses of Periods
Use periods following the numerals in a numbered list and following
complete sentences in a list.
(cid:2) 1. Enter your name and PIN.
2. Enter your address with ZIP Code.
3. Enter your home telephone number.
When a sentence ends with an abbreviation that ends with a period, do
not add another period.
(cid:2) Please meet me at 3:30 p.m.

=== Page 409 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 376
376 person
Periods are also used after initials in names (Wilma T. Grant, J. P.
Morgan), as decimal points with numbers (27.3 degrees Celsius,
$540.26, 6.9 percent), and with certain abbreviations(Ms., Dr., Inc.).
Period Faults
The incorrect use of a period is sometimes referred to as a period fault.
When a period is inserted prematurely, the result is a sentence fragment.
FRAGMENT After a long day at the office during which we finished
the quarterly report. We left hurriedly for home.
SENTENCE After a long day at the office, during which we finished
the quarterly report, we left hurriedly for home.
When two independent clauses are joined without any punctuation, the
result is a fused, or run-on, sentence. Adding a period between the
clauses is one way to correct a run-on sentence.
RUN-ON Bill was late for ten days in a row Ms. Sturgess had to
dismiss him.
CORRECT Bill was late for ten days in a row. Ms. Sturgess had to
dismiss him.
Other options are to add a comma and a coordinating conjunction
(and, but, for, or, nor, so, yet) between the clauses, to add a semicolon,
or to add a semicolon with a conjunctive adverb, such as therefore or
however.
P person
Person refers to the form of a personal pronoun that indicates whether
the pronoun represents the speaker, the person spoken to, or the person
or thing spoken about. A pronoun representing the speaker is in the
first person. (“I could not find the answer in the manual.”) A pronoun
that represents the person or people spoken to is in the second person.
(“You will be a good manager.”) A pronoun that represents the person
or people spoken about is in the thirdperson. (“Theyreceived the news
quietly.”) The following list shows first-, second-, and third-person pro-
nouns. See also case, number, and one.
PERSON SINGULAR PLURAL
First I,me,my,mine we,us,our,ours
Second you,your,yours you,your,yours
Third he,him,his,she, they,them,their,theirs
her,hers,it,its

=== Page 410 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 377
photographs 377
persuasion
Persuasive writing attempts to convince an audience to adopt the
writer’s point of view or take a particular action. Workplace writing
often uses persuasion to reinforce ideas that readers already have, to
convince readers to change their current ideas, or to lobby for a particu-
lar suggestion or policy (as in Figure P–1 on page 378). You may find
yourself advocating for safer working conditions, justifying the expense
of a new program, or writing a proposal for a large purchase. See also
contextand purpose.
In persuasive writing, the way you present your ideas is as impor-
tant as the ideas themselves. You must support your appeal with logic
and a sound presentation of facts, statistics, and examples. See also
logic errors.
A writer also gains credibility, and thus persuasiveness, through the
readers’ impressions of the document’s appearance. For this reason,
consider carefully a document’s layoutand design. See also résumés.
ETHICS NOTE Avoid ambiguity. Do not wander from your main point
and, above all, never make false claims. You should also acknowledge
any real or potentially conflicting opinions; doing so allows you to an-
ticipate and overcome objections and builds your credibility. See also
ethics in writing. ✦
The memo shown in Figure P–1 was written to persuade the engi-
neering staff to accept and participate in a change to a new computer
system. Notice that not everything in this memo is presented in a posi-
tive light. Change brings disruption, and the writer acknowledges that
fact.
A persuasive technique that places the focus on your reader’s inter- P
est and perspective is discussed in the entry “you”viewpoint. See also
correspondence.
phenomenon / phenomena
A phenomenon is an observable thing, fact, or occurrence (“a natural
phenomenon”). Its plural form is phenomena.
photographs
Photographs are often the best way to show the appearance of an ob-
ject, record an event, or demonstrate the development of a phenomenon
over a period of time. Photographs, however, cannot depict the internal

=== Page 411 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 378
378 persuasion
Interoffice Memo
TO: Engineering Staff
FROM: Harold Kawenski, MIS Administrator
DATE: April 21, 2009
SUBJECT: Plans for the Changeover to the New Computer System
As you all know, the merger with Datacom has resulted in dramatic
growth in our workload—a 30-percent increase in our customer
support services during the last several months. To cope with this
expansion, we will soon install the NRT/R4 server and QCS
Enterprise software with Web-based applications.
Let me briefly describe the benefits of this system and the ways we plan
to help you cope with the changeover.
The QCS system will help us access up-to-date marketing andproduct
information when we need it. This system will speed processing dra-
matically and give us access to all relevant company-wide databases.
Because we anticipate that our workload will increase another 30 per-
cent in the next several months, we need to get the QCS system online
and working smoothly as soon as possible.
The changeover to this system, unfortunately, will cause some disrup-
tion at first. We will need to transfer many of our legacy programs and
software applications to the new system. In addition, all of us will need
to learn to navigate in the R4 and QCS environments. Once we have
made these adjustments, however, I believe we will welcome the
changes.
To help everyone cope with the changeover, we will offer training ses-
P
sions that will begin next week. I have attached a sign-up form with
specific class times. We will also provide a technical support hotline at
extension 4040, which will be available during business hours; e-mail
support at qcs-support@conco.com; and online help documentation.
I would like to urge you to help us make a smooth transition tothe
QCS system. Please e-mail me with your suggestions or questions
about the impact of the changeover on your department. I look
forward to working with you to make this system a success.
Enclosure: Training Session Schedule
FIGUREP–1. Persuasive Memo

=== Page 412 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 379
photographs 379
workings of a mechanism or below-the-surface details of objects or
structures. Such details are better represented in drawings. Photographs
are also effective in catching the readers’attention and adding personal
relevance to such documents as brochures and newsletters. See also
readers.
An effective photograph shows important details and indicates the
relative size of the subject by including a familiar object—such as a
ruler or a person—near the subject being photographed.
Figure P–2 shows a photograph from an interactive Web presenta-
tion for a pilot training program. This photograph is one in a series that
simulates a pilot’s “walk-around”—a procedure in which pilots visu-
ally examine an aircraft in a 360-degree safety inspection prior to take-
off. In this photo, the stair steps are lowered to show the relative size of
the aircraft.
For reports, treat photographs as you do other visuals, giving them
figure numbers, call-outs (labels) to identify key features, and captions,
if needed. Position the figure number and caption so that readers can
view them and the photograph from the same orientation.
P
FIGUREP–2. Photo (of AircraftDoor).Photo courtesy of Ken Cook Company.

=== Page 413 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 380
380 phrases
ETHICS NOTE Be careful to avoid plagiarism by appropriately docu-
menting sources for photographs and to obtain copyright permission if
you plan to publish photographs that you do not take yourself. ✦
phrases
DIRECTORY
Prepositional Phrases 380 Infinitive Phrases 382
Participial Phrases 381 Gerund Phrases 383
Dangling Participial Phrases 382 Verb Phrases 383
Misplaced Participial Phrases 382 Noun Phrases 383
A phrase is a meaningful group of words that cannot make a complete
statement because it does not contain both a subject and a predicate, as
clausesdo. Phrases, which are based on nouns, nonfinite verbforms, or
verb combinations, provide context within a clause or sentence in
which they appear. See also sentence construction.
(cid:2) She reassured her staff by her calm confidence. [phrase]
A phrase may function as an adjective, an adverb, a noun, or a verb.
(cid:2) The subjects on the agendawere all discussed. [adjective]
(cid:2) We discussed the project with great enthusiasm. [adverb]
(cid:2) Working hardis her way of life. [noun]
(cid:2) The chief engineer should have been notified. [verb]
P
Even though phrases function as adjectives, adverbs, nouns, or verbs,
they are normally named for the kind of word around which they are
constructed—preposition, participle, infinitive, gerund, verb, or noun.
A phrase that begins with a preposition is a prepositional phrase, a
phrase that begins with a participle is a participial phrase, and so on.
For typical verb phrases and prepositional phrases that can cause diffi-
culty for speakers of English as a second language, see idioms.
Prepositional Phrases
A preposition is a word that shows relationship and combines with a
noun or pronoun (its object) to form a modifying phrase. A preposi-
tional phrase, then, consists of a preposition plus its object and the ob-
ject’s modifiers.
(cid:2) After the meeting, the district managers adjourned to the cafeteria.

=== Page 414 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 381
phrases 381
Prepositional phrases, because they normally modify nouns or verbs,
usually function as adverbs or adjectives. A prepositional phrase may
function as an adverb of motion (“Turn the dial four degrees to the left”)
or an adverb of manner (“Answer customers’ questions in a courteous
fashion”). A prepositional phrase may function as an adverb of place
and may appear in different places in the sentence.
(cid:2) In home and office computer systems, security is essential.
(cid:2) Security is essential in home and office computer systems.
Prepositional phrases may function as adjectives; when they do, they
follow the nouns they modify.
(cid:2) Food waste with a high protein contentcan be processed into ani-
mal food.
Be careful when you use prepositional phrases because separating a
prepositional phrase from the noun it modifies can cause ambiguity.
AMBIGUOUS The womanstanding by the security guard in the
gray suitis our division manager.
CLEAR The woman in the gray suitwho is standing by the
security guard is our division manager.
Watch as well for the overuse of prepositional phrases where modifiers
would be more economical.
OVERUSED The man with gray hair in the blue suit with
pinstripesis the former president of the company.
ECONOMICAL The gray-hairedman in the blue pin-stripedsuit is P
the former companypresident.
Participial Phrases
A participle is any form of a verb that is used as an adjective. A par-
ticipial phrase consists of a participle plus its object and its modifiers.
(cid:2) The division having the largest number of patentswill work with
NASA.
The relationship between a participial phrase and the rest of the sen-
tence must be clear to the reader. For that reason, every sentence con-
taining a participial phrase must have a noun or pronoun that the
participial phrase modifies; if it does not, the result is a dangling par-
ticipial phrase.

=== Page 415 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 382
382 phrases
Dangling Participial Phrases. A dangling participial phrase occurs
when the noun or pronoun that the participial phrase is meant to mod-
ify is not stated but only implied in the sentence. See also dangling mod-
ifiers.
DANGLING Being unhappy with the job, his efficiency suffered.
[His efficiency was not unhappy with the job; what
the participial phrase really modifies—he—is not
stated but merely implied.]
CORRECT Being unhappy with the job, he grew less efficient.
[In this version, what that participial phrase modi-
fies—he—is explicitly stated.]
Misplaced Participial Phrases. A participial phrase is misplaced when
it is too far from the noun or pronoun it is meant to modify and so ap-
pears to modify something else. Such an error can make the writer look
ridiculous.
MISPLACED We saw a large warehouse driving down the
highway.
CORRECT Driving down the highway, we saw a large
warehouse.
Infinitive Phrases
An infinitive is the basic form of a verb (go, run, talk) without the re-
strictions imposed by personand number. An infinitive is generally pre-
ceded by the word to (which is usually a preposition but in this use is
called the sign, or mark, of the infinitive). An infinitive phrase consists
P
of the word toplus an infinitive and any objects or modifiers.
(cid:2) To succeed in this field, you must be willing to assume
responsibility.
Do not confuse a prepositional phrase beginning with towith an infini-
tive phrase. In an infinitive phrase, tois followed by a verb; in a prepo-
sitional phrase, tois followed by a noun or pronoun.
PREPOSITIONAL PHRASE We went to the building site.
INFINITIVE PHRASE Our firm tries to provide a comprehensive
trainingprogram.
The implied subject of an introductory infinitive phrase should be the
same as the subject of the sentence. If it is not, the phrase is a dangling
modifier. In the following example, the implied subject of the infinitive
is youor one, not practice.

=== Page 416 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 383
plagiarism 383
you must practice.
(cid:2) To learn a new language, practice is needed.
^
Gerund Phrases
A gerund is a verbal ending in -ing that is used as a noun. A gerund
phrase consists of a gerund plus any objects or modifiers and always
functions as a noun.
SUBJECT Preparing a grant proposalis a difficult task.
DIRECT OBJECT She liked chairing the committee.
Verb Phrases
A verb phrase consists of a main verb and its helping verb.
(cid:2) He is[helping verb] working[main verb] hard this summer.
Words can appear between the helping verb and the main verb of a verb
phrase. (“He isalways working.”) The main verb is always the last verb
in a verb phrase.
Questions often begin with a verb phrase. (“Will he verify the re-
sults?”) The adverb not may be appended to a helping verb in a verb
phrase. (“He did not worktoday.”)
Noun Phrases
A noun phrase consists of a noun and its modifiers. (“Have the two new
employeesfill out these forms.”)
P
plagiarism
Plagiarism is the use of someone else’s unique ideas without acknowl-
edgment, or the use of someone else’s exact words without quotation
marksand appropriate credit. Plagiarism is considered to be the theft of
someone else’s creative and intellectual property and is not accepted in
business, science, journalism, academia, or any other field. See also
ethics in writingand research.
Citing Sources
Quoting a passage—including cutting and pasting a passage from an
Internet source into your work—is permissible only if you enclose the
passage in quotation marks and properly cite the source. For detailed
guidance on quoting correctly, see quotations. If you intend to publish,

=== Page 417 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 384
384 plagiarism
reproduce, or distribute material that includes quotations from pub-
lished works, including Web sites, you may need to obtain written per-
mission from the copyrightholders of those works.
Even Web sites that grant permission to copy, distribute, or modify
material under the “copyleft”* principle, such as Wikipedia, nonethe-
less caution that you must give appropriate credit to the source from
which material is taken (see http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:
Citing_Wikipedia).
Paraphrasingthe words and ideas of another also requires that you
cite your source, even though you do not enclose paraphrased ideas or
materials in quotation marks. (See also documenting sources.) Para-
phrasing a passage without citing the source is permissible only when
the information paraphrased is common knowledge.
Common Knowledge
Common knowledge generally refers to information that is widely
known and readily available in handbooks, manuals, atlases, and other
references. For example, the “law of supply and demand” is common
knowledge and is found in virtually every economics and business text-
book.
Common knowledge also refers to information within a specific
field that is generally known and understood by most others in that
field—even though it is not widely known by those outside the field.
For examples, see the Web Link at the end of this entry.
An indication that something is common knowledge is whether it is
repeated in multiple sources without citation. The best advice is, when
in doubt, cite the source.
P ETHICS NOTE In the workplace, employees often borrow material
freely from in-house manuals, reports, and other company documents.
Using or repurposingsuch material is neither plagiarism nor a violation
of copyright. For information on the use of public domain and govern-
ment material, see copyright. ✦
WEB LINK Avoiding Plagiarism
For a tutorial on using sources correctly,see bedfordstmartins.com/
alredtechand selectTutorials,“The St.Martin’s Tutorial on Avoiding
Plagiarism.”For links to other helpful resources,selectLinks for Hand-
book Entries.
*“Copyleft” is a play on the word copyrightand is the effort to free materials from
many of the restrictions of copyright. See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Copyleft.

=== Page 418 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 385
pointof view 385
point of view
Point of view is the writer’s relation to the information presented, as re-
flected in the use of grammatical person. The writer usually expresses
point of view in first-, second-, or third-person personal pronouns. Use
of first person indicates that the writer is a participant or an observer.
Use of second or third person indicates that the writer is giving direc-
tions, instructions, or advice, or writing about other people or some-
thing impersonal.
FIRST PERSON Iscrolled down to find the settings option.
SECOND PERSON Youneed to scroll down to find the settings option.
[Youis explicitly stated.]
Scroll down to find the settings option.
[Youis understood in such an instruction.]
THIRD PERSON Hescrolled down to find the settings option.
Consider the following sentence, revised from an impersonal to a more
personal point of view. Although the meaning of the sentence does not
change, the revision indicates that people are involved in the communi-
cation.
.
I regret we cannot accept
(cid:2) It is regrettablethatthe equipment shipped on Fridayis
^ ^ ^
unacceptable.
Many people think they should avoid the pronoun I in technical writ-
ing. Such practice, however, often leads to awkward sentences, with
people referring to themselves in the third person as oneor as the writer
P
instead of as I.
I
(cid:2) Onecan only conclude that the absorption rate is too fast.
^
However, do not use the personal point of view when an impersonal
point of view would be more appropriate or more effective because you
need to emphasize the subject matter over the writer or the reader. In
the following example, it does not help to personalize the situation; in
fact, the impersonal version may be more tactful.
PERSONAL I received objections to my proposal from several
of your managers.
IMPERSONAL Several managers have raised objections to the
proposal.
Whether you adopt a personal or an impersonal point of view depends
on the purpose and the audience of the document. For example, in an

=== Page 419 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 386
386 positive writing
informal e-mailto an associate, you would most likely adopt a personal
point of view. However, in a reportto a large group, you would proba-
bly emphasize the subject by using an impersonal point of view.
ETHICS NOTE In company correspondence, use of the pronoun wemay
be interpreted as reflecting company policy, whereas I clearly reflects
personal opinion. Which pronoun to use should be decided according
to whether you are speaking for yourself (I) or for the company (we).
(cid:2) Iunderstand your frustration with the approval process, but we
must meet the new safety regulations. ✦
ESL TIPSfor Stating an Opinion
In some cultures,stating an opinion in writing is considered impolite
or unnecessary, but in the United States, readers expect to see a
writer’s opinion stated clearly and explicitly.The opinion should be fol-
lowed by specific examples to help the reader understand the writer’s
pointof view.
positive writing
Presenting positive information as though it were negative is confusing
to readers.
NEGATIVE If the error does notinvolve data transmission, the
backup function will notbe used.
P
In this sentence, the reader must reverse two negatives to understand
the exception that is being stated. (See also double negatives.) The fol-
lowing sentence presents the exception in a positive and straightfor-
ward manner.
POSITIVE The backup function is used only when the error in-
volves data transmission.
ETHICS NOTE Negative facts or conclusions, however, should be stated
negatively; stating a negative fact or conclusion positively is deceptive
because it can mislead the reader.
DECEPTIVE In the first quarter of this year, employee exposure to
airborne lead averaged within 10 percent of acceptable
state health standards.
ACCURATE In the first quarter of this year, employee exposure to
airborne lead averaged 10 percent below acceptable
state health standards.

=== Page 420 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 387
possessive case 387
See also ethics in writing. ✦
Even if what you are saying is negative, do not state it more nega-
tively than necessary.
NEGATIVE We are withholding your shipment because we have not
received your payment.
POSITIVE We will forward your shipment as soon as we receive
your payment.
See also correspondenceand “you”viewpoint.
possessive case
A nounor pronounis in the possessive case when it represents a person,
place, or thing that possesses something. Possession is generally ex-
pressed with an apostropheand an s(“the report’stitle”), with a prepo-
sitional phraseusing of(“the title ofthe report”), or with the possessive
form of a pronoun (“ourreport”).
Practices vary for some possessive forms, but the following guide-
lines are widely used. Above all, be consistent.
Singular Nouns
Most singular nouns show the possessive case with ’s.
(cid:2) a manager’soffice the witness’stestimony
an employee’spaycheck the bus’sschedule
the company’sstock value P
When pronunciation with ’s is difficult or when a multisyllable noun
ends in a zsound, you may use only an apostrophe.
(cid:2) New Orleans’convention hotels
Plural Nouns
Plural nouns that end in -sor -esshow the possessive case with only an
apostrophe.
(cid:2) the managers’reports the witnesses’testimony
the employees’paychecks the buses’schedules
the companies’joint project
Plural nouns that do not end in -sshow the possessive with ’s.
(cid:2) children’sclothing, women’sresources, men’sroom

=== Page 421 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 388
388 possessive case
Apostrophes are not always used in official names (“ConsumersUnion”)
or for words that may appear to be possessive nouns but function as
adjectives(“a computer peripheralssupplier”).
Compound Nouns
Compound words form the possessive with ’sfollowing the final letter.
(cid:2) the attorney general’sdecision, theeditor-in-chief’sdesk, the
pipeline’sdiameter
Plurals of some compound expressions are often best expressed with a
prepositional phrase (“presentations of the editors in chief”).
Coordinate Nouns
Coordinate nouns show joint possession with ’sfollowing the last noun.
(cid:2) Fischer and Goulet’spartnership was the foundation of their
business.
Coordinate nouns show individual possession with ’s following each
noun.
(cid:2) The difference between Barker’sand Washburne’stest results was
not statistically significant.
Possessive Pronouns
P The possessive pronouns (its, whose, his, her, our, your, my, their) are
also used to show possession and do not require apostrophes. (“Even
good systems have theirflaws.”) Only the possessive form of a pronoun
should be used with a gerund (a noun formed from an -ingverb).
(cid:2) The safety officer insisted on ourwearing protective clothing.
[Wearingis the gerund.]
Possessive pronouns are also used to replace nouns. (“The responsibil-
ity was theirs.”) See also its / it’s.
Indefinite Pronouns
Some indefinite pronouns (all, any, each, few, most, none, some) form
the possessive case with the prepositionof.
(cid:2) We tested both packages and found the bacteria on the surface of
each.

=== Page 422 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 389
preparation 389
Other indefinite pronouns (everyone, someone, anyone, no one), how-
ever, use ’s.
(cid:2) Everyone’scontribution is welcome.
prefixes
A prefix is a letter or group of letters placed in front of a root word that
changes the meaning of the root word. When a prefix ends with a vowel
and the root word begins with a vowel, the prefix is often separated from
the root word with a hyphen (re-enter, pro-active, anti-inflammatory).
Some words with the double vowel are written without a hyphen
(cooperate) and others with or without a hyphen (re-elector reelect).
Prefixes, such as neo- (derived from a Greek word meaning
“new”), are often hyphenated when used with a proper noun (neo-
Keynesian). Such prefixes are not normally hyphenated when used with
common nouns, unless the base word begins with the same vowel
(neonatal, neo-orthodoxy).
A hyphen may be necessary to clarify the meaning of a prefix; for
example, reform means “correct” or “improve,” and re-form means
“change the shape of.” When in doubt, check a current dictionary.
preparation
The preparation stage of the writing process is essential. By determining
the needs of your audience, your purpose, the context, and the scopeof
coverage, you understand the information you will need to gather dur- P
ing research. See also collaborative writingand “Five Steps to Successful
Writing.”
WRITER’S CHECKLIST Preparing to Write
(cid:3)
Determine who your readers are and learn certain key facts about
them—their knowledge,attitudes,and needs relative to your subject.
(cid:3)
Determine the document’s primary purpose:Whatexactly do you
wantyour readers to know,to believe,or to be able to do when they
have finished reading your document?
(cid:3)
Consider the contextof your message and how itshould affectyour
writing.
(cid:3)
Establish the scope of your document—the type and amountof detail
you mustinclude—notonly by understanding your readers’needs
and purpose butalso by considering any external constraints,such as

=== Page 423 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 390
390 prepositions
Writer’s Checklist:Preparing to Write (continued)
word limits for trade journal articlesor the space limitations of Web
pages.See also writing for the Web.
(cid:3)
Selectthe medium appropriate to your readers and purpose.See also
selectingthe medium.
prepositions
A preposition is a word that links a noun or pronoun to another sen-
tence element by expressing such relationships as direction (to, into,
across, toward), location (at, in, on, under, over, beside, among, by, be-
tween, through), time (before, after, during, until, since), or position
(for, against, with). Together, the preposition, its object (the noun or
pronoun), and the object’s modifiers form a prepositional phrase that
acts as a modifier.
(cid:2) Answer help-line questions in a courteous manner.
[The prepositional phrase in a courteous mannermodifies the verb
answer.]
The object of a preposition (the word or phrase following the
preposition) is always in the objective case. When the object is a com-
pound, both nouns and pronouns should be in the objective case. For
example, the phrase “between you and me” is frequently and incor-
rectly written as “between you and I.” Me is the objective form of the
pronoun, and Iis the subjective form.
P Many words that function as prepositions also function as adverbs.
If the word takes an object and functions as a connective, it is a prepo-
sition; if it has no object and functions as a modifier, it is an adverb.
PREPOSITIONS The manager sat behindthe desk inher office.
ADVERBS The customer lagged behind; then he came inand
sat down.
Certain verbs, adverbs, and adjectives are normally used with cer-
tain prepositions (interested in, aware of, equated with, adhere to, ca-
pable of, object to, infer from). See also idioms.
Prepositions atthe End of a Sentence
A preposition at the end of a sentence can be an indication that the sen-
tence is awkwardly constructed.
.
She was at the
(cid:2) Thebranch office is where she was at.
^ ^

=== Page 424 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 391
presentations 391
However, if a preposition falls naturally at the end of a sentence, leave
it there. (“I don’t remember which file name I saved it under.”)
Prepositions in Titles
Capitalize prepositions in titleswhen they are the first or last words, or
when they contain five or more letters (unless you are following a style
that recommends otherwise). See also capitalization.
(cid:2) The newspaper column “InMy Opinion” included a review of the
article “New Concerns AboutDistance Education.”
Preposition Errors
Do not use redundant prepositions, such as “off of,” “in back of,” “in-
side of,” and “at about.”
EXACT The client will arrive at aboutfour o’clock.
APPROXIMATE The client will arrive atabout four o’clock.
Avoid unnecessarily adding the preposition upto verbs.
to
(cid:2) Call up andsee if he is in his office.
^
Do not omit necessary prepositions.
to
(cid:2) He was obliviousand not distracted by the view from his office
^
window.
See also concisenessand English as a second language.
P
presentations
DIRECTORY
Determining Your Purpose 392 Overhead Transparencies 396
Analyzing Your Audience 392 Presentation Software 396
Gathering Information 392 Writer’s Checklist:Using Visuals
Structuring the Presentation 393 in a Presentation 398
The Introduction 393 Delivering a Presentation 398
The Body 394 Practice 398
The Closing 394 Delivery Techniques ThatWork 399
Transitions 395 Presentation Anxiety 400
Using Visuals 395 Writer’s Checklist:Preparing for and
Flip Charts 396 Delivering a Presentation 400
Whiteboard or Chalkboard 396

=== Page 425 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 392
392 presentations
The steps required to prepare an effective presentation parallel the steps
you follow to write a document. As with writing a document, deter-
mine your purpose and analyze your audience. Then gather the facts
that will support your point of view or proposal and logically organize
that information. Presentations do, however, differ from written docu-
ments in a number of important ways. They are intended for listeners,
not readers. Because you are speaking, your manner of delivery, the
way you organize the material, and your supporting visuals require as
much attention as your content.
Determining Your Purpose
Every presentation is given for a purpose, even if it is only to share in-
formation. To determine the primary purpose of your presentation, use
the following question as a guide: What do I want the audience to
know, to believe, or to do when I have finished the presentation? Based
on the answer to that question, write a purpose statement that answers
the what?and why?questions.
(cid:2) The purpose of my presentation is to convince my company’s chief
information officer of the need to improve the appearance, con-
tent, and customer use of our company’s Web site [what] so
that she will be persuaded to allocate additional funds for site-
development work in the next fiscal year [why].
Analyzing Your Audience
Once you have determined the desired end result of the presentation,
analyze your audience so that you can tailor your presentation to their
P needs. Ask yourself these questions about your audience:
• What is your audience’s level of experience or knowledge about
your topic?
• What is the general educational level and age of your audience?
• What is your audience’s attitude toward the topic you are speaking
about, and—based on that attitude—what concerns, fears, or ob-
jections might your audience have?
• Do any subgroups in the audience have different concerns or
needs?
• What questions might your audience ask about this topic?
Gathering Information
Once you have focused the presentation, you need to find the facts and
arguments that support your point of view or the action you propose.

=== Page 426 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 393
presentations 393
As you gather information, keep in mind that you should give the audi-
ence only what will accomplish your goals; too much detail will over-
whelm them, and too little will not adequately inform your listeners or
support your recommendations. For detailed guidance about gathering
information, see research.
Structuring the Presentation
When structuring the presentation, focus on your audience. Listeners
are freshest at the outset and refocus their attention near the end. Take
advantage of that pattern. Give your audience a brief overview of your
presentation at the beginning, use the body to develop your ideas, and
end with a summary of what you covered and, if appropriate, a call to
action. See also methods of development.
The Introduction. Include in the introduction an opening that focuses
your audience’s attention, as in the following examples:
(cid:2) [Definition of a problem] “You have to write an important report,
but you’d like to incorporate lengthy handwritten notes from sev-
eral meetings you attended. Your scanner will not read these notes,
and you will have to type many pages. You groan because that
seems an incredible waste of time. Have I got a solution for you!”
(cid:2) [An attention-getting statement] “As many as 50 million Ameri-
cans have high blood pressure.”
(cid:2) [A rhetorical question] “Would you be interested in a full-sized
computer keyboard that is waterproof and noiseless, and can be
rolled up like a rubber mat?”
(cid:2) [A personal experience] “As I sat at my computer one morning, P
deleting my eighth spam message of the day, I decided that it was
time to take action to eliminate this time-waster.”
(cid:2) [An appropriate quotation] “According to researchers at the Mas-
sachusetts Institute of Technology, ‘Garlic and its cousin, the
onion, confer major health benefits—including fighting cancer,
infections, and heart disease.’”
Following your opening, use the introduction to set the stage for
your audience by providing an overview of the presentation, which can
include general or background information that will be needed to un-
derstand the detailed information in the body of your presentation. It
can also show how you have organized the material.
(cid:2) This presentation analyzes three high-volume, on-demand printers
for us to consider purchasing. Based on a comparison of all three,

=== Page 427 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 394
394 presentations
I will recommend the one I believe best meets our needs. To do so,
I’ll discuss the following five points:
1. Why we need a high-volume printer [the problem]
2. The basics of on-demand technology [general information]
3. The criteria I used to compare the three printer models
[comparison]
4. The printer models I compared and why [possible solutions]
5. The printer I propose we buy [proposed solution]
The Body. If your goal is persuasion, present the evidence that will
persuade the audience to agree with your conclusions and act on them.
If you are discussing a problem, demonstrate that it exists and offer
a solution or range of possible solutions. For example, if your intro-
duction stated that the problem is low profits, high costs, outdated
technology, or high employee absenteeism, you could use the following
approach.
1. Prove your point.
• Strategically organize the facts and data you need.
• Present the information using easy-to-understand visuals.
2. Offer solutions.
• Increase profits by lowering production costs.
• Cut overhead to reduce costs, or abolish specific programs or
product lines.
• Replace outdated technology, or upgrade existing technology.
• Offer employees more flexibility in their work schedules or
other incentives.
3. Anticipate questions (“How much will it cost?”) and objections
P (“We’re too busy now—when would we have time to learn the
new software?”) and incorporate the answers into your presen-
tation.
The Closing. Fulfill the goals of your presentation in the closing. If
your purpose is to motivate the listeners to take action, ask them to do
what you want them to do; if your purpose is to get your audience to
think about something, summarize what you want them to think about.
Many presenters make the mistake of not actually closing—they simply
quit talking, shuffle papers, and then walk away.
Because your closing is what your audience is most likely to re-
member, use that time to be strong and persuasive. Consider the follow-
ing typical closing.
(cid:2) Based on all the data, I believe that the Worthington TechLine
5510 Production Printer best suits our needs. It produces 40 pages
per minute more than its closest competitor and provides modular

=== Page 428 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 395
presentations 395
systems that can be upgraded to support new applications. The
Worthington is also compatible with our current computer net-
work, and staff training at our site is included with our purchase.
Although the initial cost is higher than that for the other two mod-
els, the additional capabilities, compatibility with most standard
environments, lower maintenance costs, and strong customer sup-
port services make it a better value.
I recommend we allocate the funds necessary for this printer by
the fifteenth of this month in order to be well prepared for the pro-
duction of next quarter’s customer publications.
This closing brings the presentation full circle and asks the audience
to fulfill the purpose of the presentation—exactly what a conclusion
should do.
Transitions. Planned transitions should appear between the introduc-
tion and the body, between major points in the body, and between the
body and the closing. Transitions are simply a sentence or two to let the
audience know that you are moving from one topic to the next. They
also prevent a choppy presentation and provide the audience with as-
surance that you know where you are going and how to get there.
(cid:2) Before getting into the specifics of each printer I compared, I’d like
to present the benefits of networked, on-demand printers in gen-
eral. That information will provide you with the background you’ll
need to compare the differences among the printers and their capa-
bilities discussed in this presentation.
It is also a good idea to pause for a moment after you have delivered a
transition between topics to let your listeners shift gears with you. Re- P
member, they do not know your plan.
Using Visuals
Well-planned visualsnot only add interest and emphasis to your presen-
tation but also clarify and simplify your message because they com-
municate clearly, quickly, and vividly. Charts, graphs, and illustrations
can greatly increase audience understanding and retention of informa-
tion, especially for complex issues and technical information that could
otherwise be misunderstood or overlooked.
ETHICS NOTE Be sure to provide credit for any visual taken from a
print or an online source. You can include a citation either on an indi-
vidual visual (such as a slide) or in a list of references or works cited
that you distribute to your audience. For information on citing visuals
from print or Web sources, see documenting sources. ✦

=== Page 429 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 396
396 presentations
You can create and present the visual components of your presenta-
tion by using a variety of media—flip charts, whiteboard or chalk-
board, overhead transparencies, slides, or computer presentation soft-
ware. See also layoutand design.
Flip Charts. Flip charts are ideal for smaller groups in a conference room
or classroom and are also ideal for brainstormingwith your audience.
Whiteboard or Chalkboard. The whiteboard or chalkboard common
to classrooms is convenient for creating sketches and for jotting notes
during your presentation. If your presentation requires extensive notes
or complex drawings, however, prepare handouts on which the audi-
ence can jot notes and which they can keep for future reference.
Overhead Transparencies. With transparencies you can create a series
of overlays to explain a complex device or system, adding (or remov-
ing) the overlays one at a time. You can also lay a sheet of paper over a
list of items on a transparency, uncovering one item at a time as you
discuss it, to focus audience attention on each point in the sequence.
Presentation Software. Presentation software, such as Microsoft Power-
Point, Corel Presentations, and OpenOffice.org Impress, lets you create
your presentation on your computer. You can develop charts and
graphs with data from spreadsheet software or locate visuals on the
Web, and then import those files into your presentation. This software
also offers standard templates and other features that help you design
effective visuals and integrated text. Enhancements include a selection
P of typefaces, highlighting devices, background textures and colors, and
clip-art images. Images can also be printed out for use as overhead
transparencies or handouts. However, avoid using too many enhance-
ments, which may distract viewers from your message. Figure P–3
shows well-balanced slides for a presentation based on the sample “for-
mal report” in Figure F–5.
Rehearse your presentation using your electronic slides, and prac-
tice your transitions from slide to slide. Also practice loading your pre-
WEB LINK Preparing Presentation Slides
For a helpful tutorial on creating effective slides,see bedfordstmartins
.com/alredtechand selectTutorials,“Preparing Presentation Slides.”For
links to additional information and tutorials for using presentation
software,see bedfordstmartins.com/alredtechand selectLinks for Hand-
book Entries.

=== Page 430 ===
HTW_ch0P.qxp 9/8/08 3:21 PM Page 397
presentations 397
Purpose of Report
CGF
• Assess program effectiveness
Reported Ethics Cases
2008 Annual Report • Examine major and minor
ethics cases reported
Susan Litzinger
Director of Ethics and Business Conduct
• Recommend improvements
CGF Aircraft Corporation
Board of Director’s Meeting
February 23, 2009 1 2
Analysis Major Cases
U Pa n r s tl u y b s S t u a b n s ti t a a t n e t d ia C te a d s e C s ases 9 4 8 4 57%
Ethics Substantiated Cases 30 Unsubstantiated
Cases Total Major Cases 172
26% Partly
Substantiated
Contact
Major Minor Method 17%
Substantiated
3 4
Recommendations Questions?
• Continue communication For more information contact: P
channels
Susan Litzinger, Director
• Increase support for hotline
Ethics and Business Conduct
• Disseminate report to employees
(555) 211-2121
• Implement employee recognition
sl@cgf.com
5 6
FIGUREP–3. Slides for a Presentation
sentation and anticipate any technical difficulties that might arise.
Should you encounter a technical snag during the presentation, stay
calm and give yourself time to solve the problem. If you cannot solve
the problem, move on without the technology. As a backup, carry a
printout of your electronic presentation as well as an extra electronic
copy on a storage medium.

=== Page 431 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 398
398 presentations
WRITER’S CHECKLIST Using Visuals in a Presentation
(cid:3)
Use textsparingly in visuals.Use bulleted or numbered lists,keeping
them in parallel structureand with balanced content.Use numbers if
the sequence is importantand bullets if itis not.
(cid:3)
Limitthe number of bulleted or numbered items to no more than five
or six per visual.
(cid:3)
Limiteach visual to no more than 40 to 45 words.Any more will clut-
ter the visual and force you to use a smaller fontthatcould impair the
audience’s ability to read it.
(cid:3)
Make your visuals consistentin type style,size,and spacing.
(cid:3)
Use a type size visible to members of the audience atthe back of the
room.Type should be boldface and no smaller than 30 points.For
headings,45- or 50-pointtype works even better.
(cid:3)
Use graphs and charts to show data trends.Use only one or two
illustrations per visual to avoid clutter and confusion.
(cid:3)
Make the contrastbetween your textand the background sharp.Use
lightbackgrounds with dark lettering and avoid textured or deco-
rated backgrounds.
(cid:3)
Use no more than 12 visuals per presentation.Any more will tax the
audience’s concentration.
(cid:3)
Match your delivery of the contentto your visuals.Do notputone set
of words or images on the screen and talk aboutthe previous visual
or,even worse,the nextone.
(cid:3)
Do notread the texton your visual word for word.Your audience can
read the visuals;they look to you to provide the key points in detail.
P
Delivering a Presentation
Once you have outlined and drafted your presentation and prepared
your visuals, you are ready to practice your presentation and delivery
techniques.
Practice. Familiarize yourself with the sequence of the material—
major topics, notes, and visuals—in your outline. Once you feel com-
fortable with the content, you are ready to practice the presentation.
PRACTICE ON YOUR FEET AND OUT LOUD. Try to practice in the room
where you will give the presentation. Practicing on-site helps you get
the feel of the room: the lighting, the arrangement of the chairs, the po-
sition of electrical outlets and switches, and so forth. Practice out loud
to gauge the length of your presentation, to uncover problems such as

=== Page 432 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 399
presentations 399
awkward transitions, and to eliminate verbal tics (such as “um,” “you
know,” and “like”).
PRACTICE WITH YOUR VISUALS AND TEXT. Integrate your visuals into
your practice sessions to help your presentation go more smoothly. Op-
erate the equipment (computer, slide projector, or overhead projector)
until you are comfortable with it. Decide if you want to use a remote
control or wireless mouse or if you want to have someone else advance
your slides. Even if things go wrong, being prepared and practiced will
give you the confidence and poise to continue.
Delivery Techniques ThatWork. Your delivery is both audible and vi-
sual. In addition to your words and message, your nonverbal communi-
cation affects your audience. Be animated—your words have impact
and staying power when they are delivered with physical and vocal ani-
mation. If you want listeners to share your point of view, show enthusi-
asm for your topic. The most common delivery techniques include
making eye contact; using movement and gestures; and varying voice
inflection, projection, and pace.
EYE CONTACT. The best way to establish rapport with your audience
is through eye contact. In a large audience, directly address those people
who seem most responsive to you in different parts of the room. Doing
that helps you establish rapport with your listeners by holding their at-
tention and gives you important visual cues that let you know how your
message is being received. Do the listeners seem engaged and actively
listening? Based on your observations, you may need to adjust the pace
of your presentation. P
MOVEMENT. Animate the presentation with physical movement.
Take a step or two to one side after you have been talking for a minute
or so. That type of movement is most effective at transitional points in
your presentation between major topics or after pauses or emphases.
Too much movement, however, can be distracting, so try not to pace.
Another way to integrate movement into your presentation is to
walk to the screen and point to the visual as you discuss it. Touch the
screen with the pointer and then turn back to the audience before be-
ginning to speak (remember the three t’s: touch, turn, and talk).
GESTURES. Gestures both animate your presentation and help com-
municate your message. Most people gesture naturally when they talk;
nervousness, however, can inhibit gesturing during a presentation. Keep
one hand free and use that hand to gesture.

=== Page 433 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 400
400 presentations
VOICE. Your voice can be an effective tool in communicating your
sincerity, enthusiasm, and command of your topic. Use it to your ad-
vantage to project your credibility. Vocal inflectionis the rise and fall of
your voice at different times, such as the way your voice naturally rises
at the end of a question (“You want it when?”). A conversational deliv-
ery and eye contact promote the feeling among members of the audi-
ence that you are addressing them directly. Use vocal inflection to
highlight differences between key and subordinate points in your pre-
sentation.
PROJECTION. Most presenters think they are speaking louder than
they are. Remember that your presentation is ineffective for anyone in
the audience who cannot hear you. If listeners must strain to hear you,
they may give up trying to listen. Correct projection problems by prac-
ticing out loud with someone listening from the back of the room.
PACE. Be aware of the speed at which you deliver your presenta-
tion. If you speak too fast, your words will run together, making it diffi-
cult for your audience to follow. If you speak too slowly, your listeners
will become impatient and distracted.
Presentation Anxiety. Everyone experiences nervousness before a pre-
sentation. Survey after survey reveals that for most people dread of
public speaking ranks among their top five fears. Instead of letting fear
inhibit you, focus on channeling your nervous energy into a helpful
stimulant. Practice will help you, but the best way to master anxiety is
to know your topic thoroughly—knowing what you are going to say
and how you are going to say it will help you gain confidence and re-
P duce anxiety as you become immersed in your subject.
WRITER’S CHECKLIST Preparing for and Delivering a Presentation
(cid:3)
Familiarize yourself with the surroundings atthe location of the
presentation ahead of time.
(cid:3)
Practice your presentation with visuals atthe location and in front
of listeners if possible.
(cid:3)
Prepare a setof notes thatwill trigger your memory during the
presentation.
(cid:3)
Make as much eye contactas possible with your audience to establish
rapportand maximize opportunities for audience feedback.
(cid:3)
Animate your delivery by integrating movement,gestures,and vocal
inflection into your presentation.However,keep your movements and
speech patterns natural.

=== Page 434 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 401
process explanation 401
Writer’s Checklist:Preparing for and Delivering a Presentation
(continued)
(cid:3)
Speak loudly and slowly enough to be heard and understood.
(cid:3)
Do notread the texton your visuals word for word;explain the key
points in detail.
For information and tips on communicating with cross-cultural audi-
ences,see global communication,global graphics,and international
correspondence.
principal / principle
Principal, meaning “an amount of money on which interest is earned or
paid” or “a chief official in a school or court proceeding,” is sometimes
confused with principle, which means “a basic truth or belief.”
(cid:2) The bank will pay 3.5 percent on the principal.
(cid:2) He sent a letter to the principalof the high school.
(cid:2) She is a person of unwavering principles.
Principalis also an adjective, meaning “main” or “primary.” (“My prin-
cipalobjection is that it will be too expensive.”)
P
process explanation
A process explanation may describe the steps in a process, an opera-
tion, or a procedure, such as the steps necessary to design and manufac-
ture a product. The introduction often presents a brief overview of the
process or lets readersknow why it is important for them to become fa-
miliar with the process you are explaining. Be sure to define terms that
readers might not understand and provide visualsto clarify the process.
See also definingtermsand instructions.
In describing a process, use transitional words and phrases to cre-
ate unity within paragraphs, and select headingsto mark the transition
from one step to the next. Figure T–3 describes both the process and
the procedure of “Monocular Recording.” Visuals, like the one used in
Figure T–3, can help convey your message.

=== Page 435 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 402
402 progress and activity reports
progress and activity reports
Progress reportsprovide details on the tasks completed for major work-
place projects, whereas activity reports focus on the ongoing work of
individual employees. Both are sometimes called status reports. Al-
though many organizations use standardized forms for these reports,
the content and structure shown in Figures P–4 and P–5 are typical.
Progress Reports
A progress report provides information to decision-makers about the
status of a project—whether it is on schedule and within budget.
Progress reports are often submitted by a contracting company to a
client company, as shown in Figure P–4. They are used mainly for proj-
ects that involve many steps over a period of time and are issued at reg-
ular intervals to describe what has been done and what remains to be
done. Progress reports help projects run smoothly by helping managers
assign work, adjust schedules, allocate budgets, and order supplies and
equipment. All progress reports for a particular project should have the
same format.
The introduction to the first progress report should identify the
project, methods used, necessary materials, expenditures, and comple-
tion date. Subsequent reports summarize the progress achieved since the
preceding report and list the steps that remain to be taken. The body of
the progress report should describe the project’s status, including details
such as schedules and costs, a statement of the work completed, and
perhaps an estimate of future progress. The report ends with conclu-
sions and recommendations about changes in the schedule, materials,
P techniques, and other information important to the project.
Activity Reports
Within an organization, employees often submit activity reports to
managers on the status of ongoing projects. Managers may combine the
activity reports of several individuals or teams into larger activity re-
ports and, in turn, submit those larger reports to their own managers.
The activity report shown in Figure P–5 was submitted by a manager
(Wayne Tribinski) who supervises 11 employees; the reader of the re-
port (Kathryn Hunter) is Tribinski’s manager.
Because the activity report is issued periodically (usually monthly)
and contains material familiar to its readers, it normally needs no intro-
duction or conclusion, although it may need a brief opening to provide
context. Although the format varies from company to company, the fol-
lowing sections are typical: Current Projects, Current Problems, Plans
for the Next Period, and Current Staffing Level (for managers).

=== Page 436 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 403
progress and activity reports 403
Hobard Construction Company www.hobardcc.com
9032 Salem Avenue (808) 769-0832
Lubbock, TX 79409 Fax: (808) 769-5327
August 14, 2009
Walter M. Wazuski
County Administrator
109 Grand Avenue
Manchester, NH 03103
Dear Mr. Wazuski:
Subject: Progress Report 8 for July 1–July 29, 2009
The renovation of the County Courthouse is progressing on schedule and
within budget. Although the cost of certain materials is higher than our original
bid indicated, weexpect to complete the project without exceeding the esti-
mated costs because the speed with which the project is being completed will
reduce overall labor expenses.
Costs
Materials used to date have cost $78,600, and labor costs have been $193,000
(including some subcontracted plumbing). Our estimate for the remainder of
the materials is $59,000; remaining labor costs should not exceed $64,000.
Work Completed
As of July 29, we had finished the installation of the circuit-breaker panels and
meters, the level-one service outlets, and all the subfloor wiring. The upgrading
of the courtroom, the upgrading of the records-storage room, and the replace-
ment of the air-conditioning units are in the preliminary stages.
P
Work Scheduled
We have scheduled the upgrading of the courtroom to take place from August
31 to October 7, the upgrading of the records-storage room from October 12
to November 18, and the replacement of the air-conditioning units from No-
vember 23 to December 16. We see no difficulty in having the job finished by
the scheduled date of December 23.
Sincerely yours,
Tran Nuguélen
Tran Nuguélen
ntran@hobardcc.com
FIGUREP–4. Progress Report

=== Page 437 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 404
404 progress and activity reports
INTEROFFICE MEMO
Date: June 8, 2009
To: Kathryn Hunter, Director of IT
WT
From: Wayne Tribinski, Manager, Applications Programs
Subject: Activity Report for May 2009
We are dealing with the following projects and problems, as of May 31.
Projects
1. For the Software Training Mailing Campaign, we anticipate pro-
ducing a set of labels for mailing software training information to
customers by June 12.
2. The Search Projectis on hold until the PL/I training has been com-
pleted, probably by the end of June.
3. The project to provide a database for the Information Management
Systemhas been expanded in scope to provide a database for all
training activities. We are rescheduling the project to take the new
scope into account.
Problems
The Information Management Systemhas been delayed. The original
schedule was based on the assumption that a systems analyst who
was familiar with the system would work on this project. Instead, the
project was assigned to a newly hired systems analyst who was in-
experienced and required much more learning time than expected.
Bill Michaels, whose activity report is attached, is correcting a
problem in the CNG Software.This correction may take a week.
P Plans for Next Month
• Complete the Software Training Mailing Campaign.
• Resume the Search Project.
• Restart the project to provide a database on information management
with a schedule that reflects its new scope.
• Write a report to justify the addition of two software developers to
my department.
• Congratulate publicly the recipients of Meritorious Achievement
Awards: Bill Thomasson and Nancy O’Rourke.
Current Staffing Level
Current staff: 11
Open requisitions: 0
Attachment
FIGUREP–5. Activity Report

=== Page 438 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 405
pronouns 405
pronoun reference
A pronoun should refer clearly to a specific antecedent. Avoid vague
and uncertain references.
, which was a big one,
(cid:2) We got the account after we wrote the proposal. It was a big one.
^
For coherence, place pronouns as close as possible to their antecedents—
distance increases the likelihood of ambiguity.
.
, praised for its architectural design, is
(cid:2) The office building next to City Hall is praised for its architectural
^ ^
design.
A general (or broad) reference or one that has no real antecedent is a
problem that often occurs when the word thisis used by itself.
experience
(cid:2) He deals with personnel problems in his work. Thishelps him in
^
his personal life.
Another common problem is a hidden reference, which has only an im-
plied antecedent.
(cid:2) A high-lipid, low-carbohydrate diet is “ketogenic” because it
the of ketone bodies
favors theirformation.
^ ^
Do not repeat an antecedent in parentheses following the pronoun. If
you feel you must identify the pronoun’s antecedent in that way, rewrite
the sentence. P
AWKWARD The senior partner first met Bob Evans when he
(Evans) was a trainee.
IMPROVED Bob Evans was a trainee when the senior partner first
met him.
For advice on avoiding pronoun-reference problems with gender, see
biased language.
pronouns
DIRECTORY
Case 407 Number 409
Gender 409 Person 409

=== Page 439 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 406
406 pronouns
A pronoun is a word that is used as a substitute for a noun (the noun
for which a pronoun substitutes is called the antecedent). Using pro-
nouns in place of nouns relieves the monotony of repeating the same
noun over and over. See also pronoun reference.
Personal pronouns refer to the person or people speaking (I, me,
my, mine; we, us, our, ours); the person or people spoken to (you, your,
yours); or the person, people, or thing(s) spoken of (he, him, his; she,
her, hers; it, its; they, them, their, theirs). See also person and pointof
view.
(cid:2) If theirfigures are correct, oursmust be in error.
Demonstrative pronouns (this, these, that, those) indicate or point out
the thing being referred to.
(cid:2) Thisis my desk. Theseare my coworkers. Thatwill be a difficult
job. Thoseare incorrect figures.
Relative pronouns (who, whom, which, that) perform a dual function:
(1) They take the place of nouns and (2) they connect and establish the
relationship between a dependent clauseand its main clause.
(cid:2) The department manager decided whowould be hired.
Interrogative pronouns (who, whom, what, which) are used to ask
questions.
(cid:2) Whatis the trouble?
Indefinite pronounsspecify a class or group of persons or things rather
than a particular person or thing (all, another, any, anyone, anything,
P both, each, either, everybody, few, many, most, much, neither, nobody,
none, several, some, such).
(cid:2) Not everyoneliked the new procedures; someeven refused to fol-
low them.
A reflexive pronoun, which always ends with the suffix -self or -selves,
indicates that the subject of the sentence acts upon itself. See also sen-
tence construction.
(cid:2) The electrician accidentally shocked herself.
The reflexive pronouns are myself, yourself, himself, herself, itself, one-
self, ourselves, yourselves, and themselves. Myselfis not a substitute for
Ior meas a personal pronoun.
I
(cid:2) Victor and myselfcompleted the report on time.
^

=== Page 440 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 407
pronouns 407
me
(cid:2) The assignment was given to Ingrid and myself.
^
Intensive pronouns are identical in form to the reflexive pronouns, but
they perform a different function: Intensive pronouns emphasize their
antecedents.
(cid:2) I myselfasked the same question.
Reciprocal pronouns (one another, each other) indicate the relation-
ship of one item to another. Each other is commonly used when refer-
ring to two persons or things and one another when referring to more
than two.
(cid:2) Lashell and Kara work well with each other.
(cid:2) The crew members work well with one another.
Case
Pronouns have forms to show the subjective, objective, and possessive
cases.
SINGULAR SUBJECTIVE OBJECTIVE POSSESSIVE
Firstperson I me my,mine
Second person you you your,yours
Third person he,she,it him,her,it his,her,hers,its
PLURAL SUBJECTIVE OBJECTIVE POSSESSIVE
Firstperson we us our,ours
Second person you you your,yours
Third person they them their,theirs
P
ESL TIPSfor Using Possessive Pronouns
In many languages,possessive pronouns agree in number and gender
with the nouns they modify.In English,however,possessive pronouns
agree in number and gender with their antecedents.Check your writ-
ing carefully for agreement between a possessive pronoun and the
word,phrase,or clause to which itrefers.
(cid:2) The womanbrought herbrother a cup of soup.
(cid:2) Robertsent hismother flowers on Mother’s Day.
A pronoun that functions as the subject of a clause or sentence is in the
subjective case(I, we, he, she, it, you, they, who). The subjective case is
also used when the pronoun follows a linking verb.

=== Page 441 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 408
408 pronouns
(cid:2) Sheis my boss.
(cid:2) My boss is she.
A pronoun that functions as the object of a verb or prepositionis in the
objective case (me, us, him, her, it, you, them, whom).
(cid:2) Ms. Davis hired Tom and me. [object of verb]
(cid:2) Between youand me, she’s wrong. [object of preposition]
A pronoun that expresses ownership is in the possessive case(my, mine,
our, ours, his, her, hers, its, your, yours, their, theirs, whose).
(cid:2) He took hisnotes with him on the business trip.
(cid:2) We took ournotes with us on the business trip.
A pronoun appositivetakes the case of its antecedent.
(cid:2) Two systems analysts, Joe and I, were selected to represent the
company.
[Joe and Iis in apposition to the subject, two systems analysts, and
must therefore be in the subjective case.]
(cid:2) The manager selected two representatives—Joe and me.
[Joe and meis in apposition to two representatives, which is the ob-
ject of the verb, selected, and therefore must be in the objective case.]
If you have difficulty determining the case of a compound pronoun, try
using the pronoun singly.
P
(cid:2) In his letter, Eldon mentioned himand me.
In his letter, Eldon mentioned him.
In his letter, Eldon mentioned me.
(cid:2) Theyand wemust discuss the terms of the merger.
Theymust discuss the terms of the merger.
Wemust discuss the terms of the merger.
When a pronoun modifies a noun, try it without the noun to determine
its case.
(cid:2) [We/Us] pilots fly our own planes.
Wefly our own planes.
[You would not write, “Usfly our own planes.”]

=== Page 442 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 409
pronouns 409
(cid:2) He addressed his remarks directly to [we/us] technicians.
He addressed his remarks directly to us.
[You would not write, “He addressed his remarks directly to we.”]
Gender
A pronoun must agree in gender with its antecedent. A problem some-
times occurs because the masculine pronoun has traditionally been used
to refer to both sexes. To avoid the sexual bias implied in such usage,
use he or sheor the plural form of the pronoun, they.
All they choose.
(cid:2) Eachmay stay or go as he chooses.
^ ^
As in this example, when the singular pronoun (he) changes to the
plural (they), the singular indefinite pronoun (each) must also change to
its plural form (all). See also biased language.
Number
Number is a frequent problem with only a few indefinite pronouns
(each, either, neither, and those ending with -bodyor -one, such as any-
body, anyone, everybody, everyone, nobody, no one, somebody, some-
one) that are normally singular and so require singular verbs and are
referred to by singular pronouns.
(cid:2) As each memberarrivesfor the meeting, please hand him or hera
copy of the confidential report. Everyonemust return the copy be-
fore he or sheleaves. Everybodyon the committee understands
that neitherof our major competitors isaware of the new process
we have developed. P
Person
Third-person personal pronouns usually have antecedents.
(cid:2) Gina presented the report to the members of the board of direc-
tors. She[Gina] first summarized it[the report] for them[the
directors] and then asked for questions.
First- and second-person personal pronouns do not normally require
antecedents.
(cid:2) Ilike my job.
(cid:2) Youwere there at the time.
(cid:2) Weall worked hard on the project.

=== Page 443 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 410
410 proofreaders’marks
proofreaders’marks
Publishers have established symbols called proofreaders’ marks that
writers and editors use to communicate in the production of publica-
tions. Familiarity with those symbols makes it easy for you to commu-
nicate your changes to others. Figure P–6 lists standard proofreaders’
marks. For using Comment and Track Changes in word-processing pro-
grams, see Digital Tip: Incorporating Tracked Changeson page 489.
MARK/SYMBOL MEANING EXAMPLE CORRECTED TYPE
Delete the manager’s report the report
manager’s
Insert the report the manager’s report
Let stand the manager’s report the manager’s report
Capitalize the monday meeting the Monday meeting
Lowercase the Monday Meeting the Monday meeting
Transpose the cover lettre the cover letter
Close space a loud speaker a loudspeaker
Insert space a loudspeaker a loud speaker
Paragraph ...report. The meeting... ...report.
The meeting...
Run in with ...report. ...report. The meeting...
previous line The meeting...
or paragraph
P
Italicize the New York Times the New York Times
Boldface Use boldface sparingly. Use boldface sparingly.
Insert period I wrote the e-mail I wrote the e-mail.
Insert comma However we cannot... However, we cannot...
Insert hyphen clear cut decision clear-cut decision
Insert em dash Our goal productivity Our goal—productivity
Insert colon We need the following : We need the following:
Insert semicolon we finished; we achieved we finished; we achieved
Insert quotation He said, I agree. He said, “I agree.”
marks
Insert apostrophe the managers report the manager’s report
FIGUREP–6. Proofreaders’Marks

=== Page 444 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 411
proofreading 411
proofreading
Proofreading is essential whether you are writing a brief e-mail or a
résumé. Grammar checkers and spell checkers are important aids to
proofreading, but they can make writers overconfident. If a typographi-
cal error results in a legitimate English word (for example, coarse in-
stead of course), the spell checker will not flag the misspelling. You may
find some of the tactics discussed in revisionuseful when proofreading;
in fact, you may find passages during proofreading that will require fur-
ther revision.
Whether the material you proofread is your own writing or that of
someone else, consider proofreading in several stages. Although you
need to tailor the stages to the specific document and to your own prob-
lem areas, the following Writer’s Checklist should provide a useful
starting point for proofreading.
WRITER’S CHECKLIST Proofreading in Stages
FIRST-STAGE REVIEW
(cid:3)
Appropriate format,as for reportsor correspondence
(cid:3)
Consistentstyle,including headings,terminology,spacing,
fonts
(cid:3)
Correctnumbering of figures and tables
SECOND-STAGE REVIEW
(cid:3)
Specific grammarand usageproblems
(cid:3)
Appropriate punctuation
(cid:3) Correctabbreviationsand capitalization P
(cid:3)
Correctspelling(especially names and places)
(cid:3)
Complete Web or e-mailaddresses
(cid:3)
Accurate data in tables and lists
(cid:3)
Cut-and-paste errors;for example,a resultof moved or deleted text
and numbers
FINAL-STAGE REVIEW
(cid:3)
Survey of your overall goals:audienceneeds and purpose
(cid:3)
Appearance of the document(see layoutand design)
(cid:3)
Review by a trusted colleague,especially for crucial documents
(see collaborative writing)
Consider using standard proofreaders’ marksfor proofreading someone
else’s document.

=== Page 445 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 412
412 proposals
DIGITAL TIP
Proofreading for FormatConsistency
Viewing whole pages on-screen is an effective way to check format-
ting, spacing, and typographical consistency, as well as the general
appearance of documents. For comparing layouts, view multiple
pages or “tile”separate documents side by side.For instructions,see
bedfordstmartins.com/alredtechand selectDigital Tips,“Proofreading
for FormatConsistency.”
proposals
DIRECTORY
Proposal Contexts and Strategies 412
Audience and Purpose 413
Solicited and Unsolicited Proposals 413
Internal and External Proposals 414
ProjectManagement 414
Writer’s Checklist:Writing Persuasive Proposals 417
Proposal Forms 418
Informal Proposal Structure 418
Formal Proposal Structure 418
Proposal Types 419
Sales Proposals 420
Grantand Research Proposals 421
P
A proposal is a document written to persuade readersthat what is pro-
posed will benefit them by solving a problem or fulfilling a need. When
you write a proposal, therefore, you must convince readers that they
need what you are proposing, that it is practical and appropriate, and
that you are the right person or organization to provide the proposed
product or service. See also persuasionand “you”viewpoint.
Proposal Contexts and Strategies
In a proposal, support your assertions with relevant facts, statistics, and
examples. Your supporting evidence must lead logically to your pro-
posed plan of action or solution. Cite relevant sources of information
that provide strong credibility to your argument. Avoid ambiguity, do
not wander from your main point, and never make false claims. See
ethics in writing.

=== Page 446 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 413
proposals 413
Audience and Purpose. Whether you send a proposal inside or outside
your organization, readers will evaluate your plan on how well you an-
swer their questions about what you are proposing to do, how you plan
to do it, how much it will cost, and how it will benefit them.
Because proposals often require more than one level of approval,
take into account all the readers in your audience. Consider especially
their levels of technical knowledge of the subject. For example, if your
primary reader is an expert on your subject but a supervisor who must
also approve the proposal is not, provide an executive summarywritten
in nontechnical language for the supervisor. You might also include a
glossary of terms used in the body of the proposal or an appendix that
explains highly detailed information in nontechnical language. If your
primary reader is not an expert but a supervisor is, write the proposal
with the nonexpert in mind and include an appendix that contains the
technical details.
Writing a persuasive and even complex proposal can be simplified
by composing a concise statement of purpose—the exact problem or
opportunity that your proposal is designed to address and how you
plan to persuade your readers to accept what you propose. Composing
a purpose statement before outlining and writing your proposal will
also help you and any collaborators understand the direction, scope,
and goals of your proposal.
Solicited and Unsolicited Proposals. Solicited proposalsare prepared in
response to a request for goods or services. Such proposals usually fol-
low the format prescribed by the procuring organization or agency,
which issues a requestfor proposals(RFP) or an invitation for bids (IFB).
An RFP often defines a need or problem and allows those who re-
spond to propose possible solutions. The procuring organization gener-
P
ally distributes an RFP to several predetermined vendors. The RFP
usually outlines the specific requirements for the ideal solution. For ex-
ample, if an organization needs an accounting system, it may require
the proposed system to create customized reports. The RFP also may
contain specific formatting requirements, such as page length, font type
and size, margin widths, headings, numbering systems, sections, and
appendix items. When responding to RFPs, you should follow their re-
quirements exactly—proposals that do not provide the required infor-
mation or do not follow the required format may be considered
“nonresponsive” and immediately rejected.
In contrast to an RFP, an IFB is commonly issued by federal, state,
and local government agencies to solicit bids on clearly defined prod-
ucts or services. An IFB is restrictive, binding the bidder to produce an
item or a service that meets the exact requirements of the organiza-
tion issuing the IFB. The goods or services are defined in the IFB by
references to performance standards stated in technical specifications.

=== Page 447 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 414
414 proposals
Bidders must be prepared to prove that their product will meet all re-
quirements of the specifications. The procuring organization generally
publishes its IFB on its Web site or in a specialized venue, such as Fed-
eral Business Opportunities at www.fedbizopps.gov. Like RFPs, IFBs
usually have specific format requirements; proposals that do not follow
the required format can be rejected without review.
Unsolicited proposals are submitted to a company or department
without a prior request for a proposal. Companies or departments
often operate for years with a problem they have never recognized (un-
necessarily high maintenance costs, for example, or poor inventory-
control methods). Many unsolicited proposals are preceded by an in-
quiry from a salesperson to determine potential interest and need. If
you receive a positive response, you would conduct a detailed study of
the prospective customer’s needs to determine whether you can be of
help and, if so, exactly how. You would then prepare your proposal on
the basis of your study.
Internal and External Proposals. Internal proposals, which can be ei-
ther solicited or unsolicited, are written by employees of an organiza-
tion for decision-makers inside that organization. The level of formality
of internal proposals often depends on the frequency with which they
are written and the degree of change proposed. Routine proposals are
typically informal and involve small spending requests, requests for per-
mission to hire new employees or increase salaries, and requests to
attend conferences or purchase new equipment. Special-purpose pro-
posals are usually more formal and involve requests to commit rela-
tively large sums of money. They have various names, but a common
designation is a capital appropriations request or a capital appropria-
P tions proposal. Figure P–7 shows a special-purpose internal proposal.
External proposals are prepared for clients, customers, or other
decision-makers outside a company or an organization. They are either
solicited or unsolicited. External proposals are almost always written as
formal proposals.
Project Management. Proposal writers are often faced with writing
high-quality, persuasive proposals under tight organizational deadlines.
Dividing the task into manageable parts is the key to accomplishing
your goals, especially when proposals involve substantial collaborative
writing. For example, you might set deadlines for completing various
proposal sections or stages of the writing process.* See also “Five Steps
to Successful Writing.”
*For help with project management, a good source is JoAnn T. Hackos, Information
Development: Managing Your Documentation Projects, Portfolio, and People(Indi-
anapolis, IN: Wiley, 2007).

=== Page 448 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 415
proposals 415
ABO, Inc.
Interoffice Memo
To: Joan Marlow, Director, Human Resources Division
From: Leslie Galusha, Chief LG
Employee Benefits Department
Date: June 15, 2009
Subject: Employee Fitness and Health-Care Costs
Health-care and workers’-compensation insurance costs at ABO,
Inc., have risen 100 percent over the last five years. In 2004, costs
were $5,675 per employee per year; in 2009, they have reached
$11,560 per employee per year. This doubling of costs mirrors a
national trend, with health-care costs anticipated to continue to
rise at the same rate for the next ten years. Controlling these es-
calating expenses will be essential. They are eating into ABO’s
profit margin because the company currently pays 70 percent of
the costs for employee coverage.
Healthy employees bring direct financial benefits to companies in
the form of lower employee insurance costs, lower absenteeism
rates, and reduced turnover. Regular physical exercise promotes
fit, healthy people by reducing the risk of coronary heart disease,
diabetes, osteoporosis, hypertension, and stress-related problems.
I propose that to promote regular, vigorous physical exercise for
our employees, ABO implement a health-care program that fo-
cuses on employee fitness.... P
Problem of Health-Care Costs
The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services recently esti-
mated that health-care costs in the United States will triple by the
year 2020. Corporate expenses for health care are rising at such a
fast rate that, if unchecked, in seven years they will significantly
erode corporate profits.
Researchers agree that people who do not participate in a regular
and vigorous exercise program incur double the health-care costs
and are hospitalized 30 percent more days than people who exer-
cise regularly. Nonexercisers are also 41 percent more likely to
submit medical claims over $10,000 at some point during their
careers than are those who exercise regularly.
FIGUREP–7. Special-Purpose Internal Proposal (Introduction)

=== Page 449 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 416
416 proposals
Joan Marlow 2 June 15, 2009
My study of Tenneco, Inc., found that the average health-care
claim for unfit men was $2,006 per illness compared with an aver-
age claim of $862 for those who exercised regularly. For women,
the average claim for those who were unfit was $2,535, more than
double the average claim of $1,039 for women who exercised.
In addition, Control Data Corporation found that each non-
exerciser cost the company an extra $515 a year in health-care
expenses.
These figures are further supported by data from independent
studies. A model created by the National Institutes of Health
(NIH) estimates that the average white-collar company could
save $596,000 annually in medical costs (per 1,000 employees)
just by promoting wellness. NIH researchers estimated that for
every $1 a firm invests in a health-care program, it saves up to
$3.75 in health-care costs. Another NIH study of 667 insurance-
company employees showed savings of $2.65 million over a
five-year period. The same study also showed a 400 percent
drop in absentee rates after the company implemented a company-
wide fitness program.
Possible Solutions for ABO
The benefits of regular, vigorous physical activity for employees
and companies are compelling. To achieve these benefits at ABO,
I propose that we choose from one of two possible options: Build
in-house fitness centers at our warehouse facilities, or offer em-
ployees several options for membership at a national fitness club.
The following analysis compares...
P
Conclusion and Recommendation
I recommend that ABO, Inc., participate in the corporate member-
ship program at AeroFitness Clubs, Inc., by subsidizing employee
memberships. By subsidizing memberships, ABO shows its
commitment to the importance of a fit workforce. Club member-
ship allows employees at all five ABO warehouses to participate
in the program. The more employees who participate, the greater
the long-term savings in ABO’s health-care costs. Building and
equipping fitness centers at all five warehouse sites would require
an initial investment of nearly $2.5 million. These facilities
would, in addition, occupy valuable floor space—on average,
4,000 square feet at each warehouse. Therefore, this option would
be very costly.
FIGUREP–7. Special-Purpose Internal Proposal (continued) (Body)

=== Page 450 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 417
proposals 417
Joan Marlow 3 June 15, 2009
Enrolling employees in the corporate program at AeroFitness
would allow them to receive a one-month free trial membership.
Those interested in continuing could then join the club and pay
half of the one-time membership fee of $900 and receive a
30-percent discount on the $600 yearly fee. The other half of the
membership fee ($450) would be paid for by ABO. If employees
leave the company, they would have the option of purchasing
ABO’s share of the membership to continue at AeroFitness or
selling their half of the membership to another ABO employee
wishing to join AeroFitness.
Implementing this program will help ABO, Inc., reduce its health-
care costs while building stronger employee relations by offering
employees a desirable benefit. If this proposal is adopted, I have
some additional thoughts about publicizing the program to encour-
age employee participation. I look forward to discussing the details
of this proposal with you and answering any questions you may
have.
FIGUREP–7. Special-Purpose Internal Proposal (continued) (Conclusion)
WRITER’S CHECKLIST Writing Persuasive Proposals
(cid:3)
Analyze your audience carefully to determine how to bestmeetyour P
readers’needs or requirements.
(cid:3)
Write a concise purpose statementatthe outsetto clarify your
proposal’s goals.
(cid:3)
Divide the writing task into manageable segments and develop a
timeline for completing tasks.
(cid:3)
Review the descriptions of proposal contexts,structure,and types
in this entry.
(cid:3)
Focus on the proposal’s benefits to readers and anticipate their
questions or objections.
(cid:3)
Incorporate evidence to supportthe claims of your proposal.
(cid:3)
Selectan appropriate,visually appealing format.See layoutand
design.
(cid:3)
Use a confident,positive tonethroughoutthe proposal.

=== Page 451 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 418
418 proposals
Proposal Forms
Proposals are written within a specific context. Understanding the con-
text, as described in that entry, will help you determine the most appro-
priate writing strategy as well as the proposal’s length, formality, and
structure.
Informal Proposal Structure. Informal proposals are relatively short
(about five pages or fewer) and typically consist of an introduction, a
body, and a conclusion.
INTRODUCTION. The introduction should define the purpose and
scope of your proposal as well as the problem you propose to address or
solve. You may also include any relevant background or context that will
help readers appreciate the benefits of what you will propose in the body.
BODY. The body should offer the details of your plan to address or
solve the problem and explain (1) what service or product you are of-
fering; (2) how you will perform the work and what special materials
you may use; (3) the schedule you plan to follow that designates when
each phase of the project will be completed; and (4) if appropriate, a
breakdown of project costs.
CONCLUSION. The conclusion should persuasively resell your pro-
posal by emphasizing the benefits of your plan, solution, product, or ser-
vice over any competing ideas or projects. You may also need to include
details about the time period during which the proposal is valid. Effec-
tive conclusions show confidence in your proposal, your appreciation
P for the opportunity to submit the proposal, and your willingness to
provide further information, as well as encouraging your reader to act
on your proposal.
Formal Proposal Structure. Proposals longer than five pages are often
called formal proposals and typically include front matter and back
matter. The number of sections in a proposal depends on the audience,
the purpose, and the scope of the proposal, or on the specific require-
ments outlined in an RFP or IFB. If you are responding to an RFP or
IFB, follow the proposal organization and format requirements exactly
as stated; otherwise your proposal may be considered noncompliant
and may be rejected without review (see Solicited and Unsolicited Pro-
posals on pages 413–14). If you are not responding to an RFP or IFB,
sections of formal proposals can often be grouped into front matter,
body, and back matter. (For more information on many of the follow-
ing components, see formal reports.)

=== Page 452 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 419
proposals 419
FRONT MATTER
• Cover Letter or Letter of Transmittal. In the cover letter, express
appreciation for the opportunity to submit your proposal, any help
from the customer (or decision-maker), and any prior positive as-
sociations with the customer. Then summarize the proposal’s
recommendations and express confidence that they will satisfy the
customer’s or decision-maker’s needs.
• Title Page. Include the titleof the proposal, the date, the name and
logo of the organization to which it is being submitted, and your
company name and logo.
• Table of Contents. Include a table of contentsin longer proposals
to guide readers to important sections, which should be listed ac-
cording to beginning page numbers.
• List of Figures. If your proposal has six or more figures, include a
list of figures with captions as well as figure and page numbers. See
visuals.
BODY
• Executive Summary. Briefly summarize the proposal’s highlights in
persuasive, nontechnical language for decision-makers.
• Introduction. (See the sections Sales Proposalsand Grant and Re-
search Proposalsfor content typically included in this section.)
• Body. (See the sections Sales Proposalsand Grant and Research
Proposalsfor content typically included in this section.)
• Conclusion. (See the sections Sales Proposalsand Grant and Re-
search Proposalsfor content typically included in this section.)
BACK MATTER P
• Appendixes. Provide résumés of key personnel or material of inter-
est to some readers, such as statistical analyses, organizational
charts, and workflow diagrams.
• Bibliography. List sources consulted in preparing the proposal,
such as research studies, specifications, and standards. See bibli-
ographiesand documenting sources.
• Glossary. If your proposal contains terms that will be unfamiliar to
your intended audience, list and define them in the glossary.
Proposal Types
Proposals are written for many specific purposes, but the two most
common types of proposals are sales proposals and grant and research
proposals.

=== Page 453 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 420
420 proposals
Sales Proposals. A sales proposal is a company’s offer to provide spe-
cific goods or services to a potential buyer within a specified period of
time and for a specified price. A sales proposal must demonstrate above
all that the prospective customer’s purchase of the seller’s products or
services will solve a problem, improve operations, or offer other sub-
stantial benefits.
Sales proposals vary greatly in size and sophistication—from sev-
eral pages written by one person, to dozens of pages written collabora-
tively by several people, to hundreds of pages written by a team of
professional proposal writers. A short sales proposal might bid for the
construction of a single home, a moderate-length proposal might bid
for the installation of a computer network, and a large proposal might
bid for the construction of a multimillion-dollar water-purification sys-
tem or shopping center.
ETHICS NOTE Always keep in mind that, once submitted, a sales pro-
posal is a legally binding document that promises to offer goods or ser-
vices within a specified time and for a specified price. ✦
Your first task in writing a sales proposal is to find out exactly
what your prospective customer needs. Then determine whether your
organization can satisfy that customer’s needs. If appropriate, compare
your company’s strengths with those of competing firms, determine
your advantages over them, and emphasize those advantages in your
proposal.
If you are creating a sales proposal in response to an RFP or IFB,
be sure to comply with information and section requirements exactly as
stated—do not include irrelevant or extraneous information or you
may risk having your proposal rejected. If you are not responding to an
RFP or IFB, your sales proposal may include some or all of the follow-
P
ing sections (keep in mind that formal sales proposals will also include
front matter and back matter):
• Introduction. Explain the reasons for the proposal, emphasizing
reader benefits.
• Background or Problem. Describe the problem or opportunity
your proposal addresses. To make your proposal more persuasive,
your problem statement should illustrate how your proposal will
benefit your client’s organization.
• Product Description. If your proposal offers products as well as
services, include a general description of the products and any
technical specifications.
• Detailed Solutions (Rationale). Explain in a detailed section that
will be read by technical specialists exactly how you plan to do
what you are proposing.

=== Page 454 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 421
proposals 421
• Cost Analysis. Itemize the estimated costs of all the products and
services you are offering.
• Delivery Schedule or Work Plan. Outline how you will accomplish
the work and show a timetable for each phase of the project.
• Staffing. Summarize the expertise (education, experience, and certi-
fications) of key personnel who will work on the project. Include
their résumés in an appendix.
• Site Preparation. If your recommendations include modifying the
customer’s physical facilities, include a site-preparation description
that details the required modifications.
• Training Requirements. If the products and services you are
proposing require training the customer’s employees, specify the
required training and its cost.
• Statement of Responsibilities. To prevent misunderstandings about
what your and your customer’s responsibilities will be, state those
responsibilities.
• Organizational Sales Pitch. Describe your company, its history, and
its present position in the industry. An organizational sales pitch is
designed to sell your company and its general capability in the
field. It promotes the company and concludes the proposal on a
positive, persuasive note.
• Authorization Request and Deadline. Close with a request for ap-
proval and a deadline that explains how long the proposed prices
are valid.
• Conclusion. Include a persuasive conclusion that summarizes the
proposal’s key points and stresses your company’s strong points.
P
Figure P–8 shows sections from a major sales proposal (shown in full at
the following Web Link).
WEB LINK Sample Sales Proposals
For a complete and an annotated version of Figure P–8,as well as ad-
ditional sample proposals and the RFP to which Figure P–8 responded,
see bedfordstmartins.com/alredtechand selectModel Documents Gallery.
Grantand Research Proposals. Grant proposals request funds or ma-
terial goods to support a specific project or cause. Grants are not loans
and usually do not have to be repaid. Many government and private
agencies solicit and fund research or grant proposals. A scientist, for ex-
ample, may write a grant to the National Institutes of Health to request
a specific sum of money to conduct research on a new cancer drug.

=== Page 455 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 422
422 proposals
The Waters Corporation
17 North Waterloo Blvd.
Tampa, Florida 33607
Phone:(813) 919-1213 Fax:(813) 919-4411
www.waters.com
September 2, 2009
Mr. John Yeung, General Manager
Cookson’s Retail Stores, Inc.
101 Longuer Street
Savannah, Georgia 31499
Dear Mr. Yeung:
The Waters Corporation appreciates the opportunity to respond to
Cookson’s Request for Proposals dated July 20, 2009. We would
like to thank Mr. Becklight, Director of your Management Infor-
mation Systems Department, for his invaluable contributions to the
study of your operations that we conducted before preparing our
proposal.
It has been Waters’s privilege to provide Cookson’s with retail
systems and equipment since your first store opened many years
ago. Therefore, we have become very familiar with your require-
ments as they have evolved during the expansion you have
P experienced since that time. Waters’s close working relationship
with Cookson’s has resulted in a clear understanding of Cookson’s
philosophy and needs.
Our proposal describes a Waters Interactive Terminal/Retail
Processor System designed to meet Cookson’s network and pro-
cessing needs. It will provide all of your required capabilities,
from the point-of-sale operational requirements at the store termi-
nals to the host processor. The system uses the proven Retail III
modular software, with its point-of-sale applications, and the
superior Interactive Terminal, with its advanced capabilities and
design. This system is easily installed without extensive customer
reprogramming.
FIGUREP–8. Sales Proposal (Cover Letter)

=== Page 456 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 423
proposals 423
Mr. J. Yeung
Page 2
September 2, 2009
The Waters Interactive Terminal/Retail Processor System, which is
compatible with much of Cookson’s present equipment, not only
will answer your present requirements but will provide the flexi-
bility to add new features and products in the future. The system’s
unique hardware modularity, efficient microprocessor design, and
flexible programming capability greatly reduce the risk of obso-
lescence.
Thank you for the opportunity to present this proposal. You may
be sure that we will use all the resources available to the Waters
Corporation to ensure the successful implementation of the new
system.
Sincerely yours,
Janet A. Curtain
Executive Account Manager
General Merchandise Systems
(jcurtain@waters.com)
Enclosure: Proposal
P
FIGUREP–8. Sales Proposal (continued) (Cover Letter)

=== Page 457 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 424
424 proposals
The Waters Proposal September 2, 2009
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The Waters 319 Interactive Terminal/615 Retail Processor System will
provide your management with the tools necessary to manage people
and equipment more profitably with procedures that will yield more cost-
effective business controls for Cookson’s.
The equipment and applications proposed for Cookson’s were selected
through the combined effort of Waters and Cookson’s Management Infor-
mation Systems Director, Mr. Becklight. The architecture of the system
will respond to your current requirements and allow for future expansion.
The features and hardware in the system were determined from data ac-
quired through the comprehensive survey we conducted at your stores in
July of this year. The total of 71 Interactive Terminals proposed to service
your four store locations is based on the number of terminals currently in
use and on the average number of transactions processed during normal
and peak periods. The planned remodeling of all four stores was also con-
sidered, and the suggested terminal placement has been incorporated into
the working floor plan. The proposed equipment configuration and soft-
ware applications have been simulated to determine system performance
based on the volumes and anticipated growth rates of the Cookson’s
stores.
The information from the survey was also used in the cost justification,
P which was checked and verified by your controller, Mr. Deitering. The
cost-effectiveness of the Waters Interactive Terminal/Retail Processor
System is apparent. Expected savings, such as the projected 46 percent
reduction in sales audit expenses, are realistic projections based on
Waters’s experience with other installations of this type.
Waters has a proven track record of success in the manufacture, installa-
tion, and servicing of retail business information systems stretching
over decades. We believe that the system we propose will extend and
strengthen our successful and long-term partnership with Cookson’s.
– 1 –
FIGUREP–8. Sales Proposal (continued) (Executive Summary)

=== Page 458 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 425
proposals 425
The Waters Proposal September 2, 2009
GENERAL SYSTEM DESCRIPTION
The point-of-sale system that Waters is proposing for Cookson’s in-
cludes two primary Waters products. These are the 319 Interactive
Terminal and the 615 Retail Processor.
Waters 319 Interactive Terminal
The primary component in the proposed retail system is the Interactive
Terminal. It contains a full microprocessor, which gives it the flexibility
that Cookson’s has been looking for.
The 319 Interactive Terminal provides you with freedom in sequencing
a transaction. You are not limited to a preset list of available steps or
transactions. The terminal program can be adapted to provide unique
transaction sets, each designed with a logical sequence of entry and pro-
cessing to accomplish required tasks. In addition to sales transactions
recorded on the selling floor, specialized transactions such as theater-
ticket sales and payments can be designed for your customer-service area.
The 319 Interactive Terminal also functions as a credit authorization
device, either by using its own floor limits or by transmitting a credit
inquiry to the 615 Retail Processor for authorization.
Data-collection formats have been simplified so that transaction editing
and formatting are much more easily accomplished. The IS manager has
already been provided with documentation on these formats and has out- P
lined all data-processing efforts that will be necessary to transmit the
data to your current systems. These projections have been considered
in the cost justification.
Waters 615 Retail Processor
The Waters 615 Retail Processor is a minicomputer system designed
to support the Waters family of retail terminals. The...
[The proposal next describes the Waters 615 Retail Processor before
moving on to the detailed solution section.]
FIGUREP–8. Sales Proposal (continued) (General Description of Products)

=== Page 459 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 426
The Waters Proposal September 2, 2009
PAYROLLAPPLICATION
Current Procedure
Your current system of reporting time requires each hourly employee to
sign a time sheet; the time sheet is reviewed by the department manager
and sent to the Payroll Department on Friday evening. Because the week
ends on Saturday, the employee must show the scheduled hours for Satur-
day and not the actual hours; therefore, the department manager must
adjust the reported hours on the time sheet for employees who do not re-
port on the scheduled Saturday or who do not work the number of hours
scheduled.
The Payroll Department employs a supervisor and three full-time clerks.
To meet deadlines caused by an unbalanced workflow, an additional part-
time clerk is used for 20 to 30 hours per week. The average wage for this
clerk is $9.00 per hour.
Advantage of Waters’s System
The 319 Interactive Terminal can be programmed for entry of payroll data
for each employee on Monday morning by department managers, with the
data reflecting actual hours worked. This system would eliminate the need
for manual batching, controlling, and data input. The Payroll Department
estimates conservatively that this work consumes 40 hours per week.
Hours per week 40
Average wage (part-time clerk) ×9.00
Weekly payroll cost $360.00
Annual savings $18,720
Elimination of the manual tasks of tabulating, batching, and controlling
P can save 0.25 hourly unit. Improved workflow resulting from timely data
in the system without data-input processing will allow more efficient use
of clerical hours. This would reduce payroll by the 0.50 hourly unit cur-
rently required to meet weekly check disbursement.
Eliminate manual tasks 0.25
Improve workflow 0.75
40-hour unit reduction 1.00
Hours per week 40
Average wage (full-time clerk) 11.00
Savings per week $440.00
Annual savings $22,880
TOTAL SAVINGS: $41,600
– 5 –
FIGUREP–8. Sales Proposal (continued) (Detailed Solution)
426

=== Page 460 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 427
The Waters Proposal September 2, 2009
COSTANALYSIS
This section of our proposal provides detailed cost information for the
Waters 319 Interactive Terminal and the Waters 615 Retail Processor. It
then multiplies these major elements by the quantities required at each of
your four locations.
319 Interactive Terminal
Maint.
Equipment Price (1 yr.)
Terminal $2,895 $167
Journal Printer 425 38
Receipt Printer 425 38
Forms Printer 525 38
Software 220 —
TOTALS $4,490 $281
[The cost section goes on to describe other costs to install the system be-
fore summarizing the costs.]
The following table summarizes all costs.
Maint.
Location Hardware (1 yr.) Software
Store No. 1 $72,190 $4,975 $3,520
Store No. 2 89,190 6,099 4,400
Store No. 3 76,380 5,256 3,740
Store No. 4 80,650 5,537 3,960
P
Data Center 63,360 6,679 12,480
Subtotals $381,770 $28,546 $28,100
TOTAL $438,416
DELIVERY SCHEDULE
Waters is normally able to deliver 319 Interactive Terminals and 615 Re-
tail Processors within 30 days of the date of the contract. This can vary
depending on the rate and size of incoming orders.
All the software recommended in this proposal is available for immediate
delivery. We do not anticipate any difficulty in meeting your tentative de-
livery schedule.
– 8 –
FIGUREP–8. Sales Proposal (continued) (CostAnalysis and Delivery Schedule)
427

=== Page 461 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 428
428 proposals
The Waters Proposal September 2, 2009
SITE PREPARATION
Waters will work closely with Cookson’s to ensure that each site is prop-
erly prepared prior to system installation. You will receive a copy of
Waters’s installation and wiring procedures manual, which lists the physi-
cal dimensions, service clearance, and weight of the system components
in addition to the power, logic, communications-cable, and environmental
requirements. Cookson’s is responsible for all building alterations and
electrical facility changes, including the purchase and installation of com-
munications cables, connecting blocks, and receptacles.
Wiring
For the purpose of future site considerations, Waters’s in-house wiring
specifications for the system call for two twisted-pair wires and twenty-
two shielded gauges. The length of communications wires must not
exceed 2,500 feet.
As a guide for the power supply, we suggest that Cookson’s consider the
following:
1. The branch circuit (limited to 20 amps) should service no equip-
ment other than 319 Interactive Terminals.
2. Each 20-amp branch circuit should support a maximum of three
Interactive Terminals.
3. Each branch circuit must have three equal-size conductors—one
P
hot leg, one neutral, and one insulated isolated ground.
4. Hubbell IG 5362 duplex outlets or the equivalent should be used
to supply power to each terminal.
5. Computer-room wiring will have to be upgraded to support the
615 Retail Processor.
– 9 –
FIGUREP–8. Sales Proposal (continued) (Site-Preparation Section)

=== Page 462 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 429
proposals 429
The Waters Proposal September 2, 2009
TRAINING
To ensure a successful installation, Waters offers the following training
course for your operators.
Interactive Terminal/Retail Processor Operations
Course number: 8256
Length: three days
Tuition: $500.00
This course provides the student with the skills, knowledge, and practice
required to operate an Interactive Terminal/Retail Processor System.
Online, clustered, and stand-alone environments are covered.
We recommend that students have a department-store background and
that they have some knowledge of the system configuration with which
they will be working.
P
– 10 –
FIGUREP–8. Sales Proposal (continued) (Training Section)

=== Page 463 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 430
430 proposals
The Waters Proposal September 2, 2009
RESPONSIBILITIES
On the basis of its years of experience in installing information-
processing systems, Waters believes that a successful installation
requires a clear understanding of certain responsibilities.
Waters’s Responsibilities
Generally, it is Waters’s responsibility to provide its users with needed as-
sistance during the installation so that live processing can begin as soon
thereafter as is practical. The following items describe our specific
responsibilities:
• Provide operations documentation for each application that you
acquire from Waters.
• Provide forms and other supplies as ordered.
• Provide specifications and technical guidance for proper site
planning and installation.
• Provide adviser assistance in the conversion from your present
system to the new system.
Cookson’s Responsibilities
Cookson’s will be responsible for the suggested improvements described
earlier, as well as the following:
• Identify an installation coordinator and system operator.
P
• Provide supervisors and clerical personnel to perform conversion
to the system.
• Establish reasonable time schedules for implementation.
• Ensure that the physical site requirements are met.
• Provide personnel to be trained as operators and ensure that other
employees are trained as necessary.
• Assume the responsibility for implementing and operating the
system.
– 11 –
FIGUREP–8. Sales Proposal (continued) (Statementof Responsibilities)

=== Page 464 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 431
proposals 431
The Waters Proposal September 2, 2009
DESCRIPTION OFVENDOR
The Waters Corporation develops, manufactures, markets, installs, and
services total business information-processing systems for selected mar-
kets. These markets are primarily in the retail, financial, commercial,
industrial, health-care, education, and government sectors.
The Waters total-system concept encompasses one of the broadest hard-
ware and software product lines in the industry. Waters computers range
from small business systems to powerful general-purpose processors.
Waters computers are supported by a complete spectrum of terminals,
peripherals, and data-communication networks, as well as an extensive li-
brary of software products. Supplemental services and products include
data centers, field service, systems engineering, and educational centers.
The Waters Corporation was founded in 1934 and presently has approxi-
mately 26,500 employees. The Waters headquarters is located at 17 North
Waterloo Boulevard, Tampa, Florida, with district offices throughout the
United States and Canada.
WHYWATERS?
Strong Commitment to the Retail Industry
Waters’s commitment to the retail industry is stronger than ever. We are
continually striving to provide leadership in the design and implementa-
tion of new retail systems and applications that will ensure our users of a
logical growth pattern.
P
Dynamic Research and Development
Over the years, Waters has spent increasingly large sums on research-
and-development efforts to ensure the availability of products and
systems for the future. In 2008, our research-and-development ex-
penditure for advanced systems design and technological innovations
reached the $70-million level.
Leading Point-of-Sale Vendor
Waters is a leading point-of-sale vendor, having installed over 150,000
units. The knowledge and experience that Waters has gained over the
years from these installations ensure well-coordinated and effective
systems implementations.
– 12 –
FIGUREP–8. Sales Proposal (continued) (Vendor Description and Organizational
Sales Pitch)

=== Page 465 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 432
432 proposals
The Waters Proposal September 2, 2009
CONCLUSION
Waters welcomes the opportunity to submit this proposal to Cookson’s.
The Waters Corporation is confident that we have offered the right
solution at a competitive price. Based on the hands-on analysis we
conducted, our proposal takes into account your current and projected
workloads and your plans to expand your facilities and operations. Our
proposal will also, we believe, afford Cookson’s future cost-avoidance
measures in employee time and in enhanced accounting features.
Waters has a proven track record of success in the manufacture, installa-
tion, and servicing of retail business information systems stretching over
many decades. We also have a demonstrated record of success in our past
business associations with Cookson’s. We believe that the system we pro-
pose will extend and strengthen this partnership.
Should you require additional information about any facet of this pro-
posal, please contact Janet A. Curtain, who will personally arrange to
meet with you or arrange for Waters’s technical staff to meet with you
or send you the information you need.
We look forward to your decision and to continued success in our work-
ing relationship with Cookson’s.
P
– 13 –
FIGUREP–8. Sales Proposal (continued) (Conclusion)

=== Page 466 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 433
proposals 433
Or the president of Habitat for Humanity may write a grant to a lum-
ber company asking for a donation of lumber to help construct new
housing for disadvantaged families.
Research proposals request approval to conduct researchto investi-
gate a problem or possible improvements to a product or an operation.
Because their purpose is to gain approval to conduct research, they do
not focus on particular solutions or ultimate results. For example, an
engineer may submit a research proposal to a manager for permission
to research a new method that improves cement strength for bridges.
Similarly, students often submit research proposals to request approval
of their research plans for term projects, such as formal reports, or the-
sis projects.
Grant and research proposals are persuasive when they clearly de-
fine your research goals, your plan for achieving those goals, and your
qualifications to perform the research. The proposal typically includes
the following key components:
• Introduction. Explain the reasons for and the benefits of the
proposal. What can readers expect as a result of the proposed
research, and what is the value of your potential findings?
• Background. Describe the problem your research will address so
that readers are confident that you understand the problem com-
pletely. Illustrate how both your primary audience and others will
benefit from the results of your proposed research.
• Research Plan. Discuss in detail your plan for conducting the re-
search. First, focus on your research objectives—what specifically
you plan to investigate. Then, focus on your research methods—
how you plan to achieve your objectives (through interviewing?
P
on the Web? through other sources?).
• Work Schedule. Outline realistic deadlines for specific research
tasks that will help you achieve your objectives and meet the final
deadline.
• Qualifications.Summarize the expertise of those who will con-
duct the research. You might also include their résumésin an
appendix.
• Budget. Provide a list of projected costs for your research project,
as appropriate, including costs of all resources needed to carry out
your research plan.
• Conclusion. Remind the reader of the benefits from your research
and any specific products that will result, such as a formal report.
Close with a request for approval by a specific date and offer to
answer any of the readers’ questions.

=== Page 467 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 434
434 pseudo- / quasi-
pseudo- / quasi-
As a prefix, pseudo-, meaning “false or counterfeit,” is joined to the
root word without a hyphenunless the root word begins with a capital
letter (pseudoscience, pseudo-Newtonian). Pseudo- is sometimes con-
fused with quasi-, meaning “somewhat” or “partial.” Unlike semi-,
quasi- means “resembling something” rather than “half.” Quasi- is
usually hyphenated in combinations (quasi-scientific theories). See also
bi- / semi-.
punctuation
Punctuation helps readersunderstand the meaning and relationships of
words, phrases, clauses, and sentences. Marks of punctuation link, sep-
arate, enclose, indicate omissions, terminate, and classify. Most punctu-
ation marks can perform more than one function. See also sentence
construction.
The use of punctuation is determined by grammatical conventions
and the writer’s intention. Understanding punctuation is essential for
writers because it enables them to communicate with clarity and preci-
sion. See also grammar.
Detailed information on each mark of punctuation is given in its
own entry. The following are the 13 marks of punctuation.
apostrophe ’ parentheses ( )
brackets [ ] period .
P
colon : question mark ?
comma , quotation marks “ ”
dash — semicolon ;
exclamation mark ! slash /
hyphen -
See also abbreviations, capitalization, contractions, dates, ellipses, ital-
ics, and numbers.
WEB LINK Practicing Punctuation
For online exercises on punctuation,see bedfordstmartins.com/alredtech
and selectExercise Central.

=== Page 468 ===
6860ch0P.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 435
purpose 435
purpose
What do you want your readersto know, to believe, or to do when they
have read your document? When you answer that question about your
audience, you have determined the primary purpose, or objective, of
your document. Be careful not to state a purpose too broadly. A state-
ment of purpose such as “to explain continuing-education standards” is
too general to be helpful during the writing process. In contrast, “to ex-
plain to Critical-Care Nurse Society (CCNS) members how to deter-
mine if a continuing-education course meets CCNS professional stan-
dards” is a specific purpose that will help you focus on what you need
your document to accomplish. Often the context will help you focus
your purpose.
The writer’s primary purpose is often more complex than simply
“to explain” something, as shown in the previous paragraph. To fully
understand this complexity, you need to ask yourself not only whyyou
are writing the document but whatyou want to influence your reader to
believe or to do after reading it. Suppose a writer for a newsletter has
been assigned to write an article about cardiopulmonary resuscitation
(CPR). In answer to the question what? the writer could state the pur-
pose as “to emphasize the importance of CPR.” To the question why?
the writer might respond, “to encourage employees to sign up for
evening CPR classes.” Putting the answers to the two questions to-
gether, the writer’s purpose might be stated as, “To write a document
that will emphasize the importance of CPR and encourage employees to
sign up for evening CPR classes.” Note that the primary purpose of this
document is to persuade the readers of the importance of CPR, and the
secondary goal is to motivate them to register for a class. Secondary
goals often involve such abstract notions as to motivate, to persuade, to P
reassure, or to inspire your reader. See also persuasion.
If you answer the questions what? and why? and put the answers
into writing as a stated purpose that includes both primary and sec-
ondary goals, you will simplify your writing task and more likely
achieve your purpose. For a collaborative writingproject, it is especially
important to collectively write a statement of your purpose to ensure
that the document achieves its goals. Do not lose sight of that purpose
as you become engrossed in the other steps of the writing process. See
also “Five Steps to Successful Writing.”

=== Page 469 ===
6860ch0Q.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 436
Q
question marks
The question mark (?) most often ends a sentence that is a direct ques-
tion or request.
(cid:2) Where did you put the specifications? [direct question]
(cid:2) Will you e-mail me if your shipment does not arrive by June 10?
[request]
Use a question mark to end a statement that has an interrogative mean-
ing—a statement that is declarative in form but asks a question.
(cid:2) The lab report is finished? [question in declarative form]
Question marks may follow a series of separate items within an inter-
rogative sentence.
(cid:2) Do you remember the date of the contract? Its terms? Whether you
signed it?
Use a question mark to end an interrogative clause within a declarative
sentence.
(cid:2) It was not until July (or was it August?) that we submitted the re-
port.
Q
Retain the question mark in a title that is being cited, even though the
sentence in which it appears has not ended.
(cid:2) Can Quality Be Controlled?is the title of her book.
Never use a question mark to end a sentence that is an indirect ques-
tion.
.
(cid:2) He asked me where I put the specifications/?
^
When a question is a polite request or an instruction to which an affir-
mative response is assumed, a question mark is not necessary.
(cid:2) Will you call me as soon as he arrives. [polite request]
436

=== Page 470 ===
6860ch0Q.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 437
questionnaires 437
When used with quotations, the placement of the question mark is im-
portant. When the writer is asking a question, the question mark be-
longs outside the quotation marks.
(cid:2) Did she actually say, “I don’t think the project should continue”?
If the quotation itself is a question, the question mark goes inside the
quotation marks.
(cid:2) She asked, “Do we have enough funding?”
If both cases apply—the writer is asking a question and the quotation
itself is a question—use a single question mark inside the quotation
marks.
(cid:2) Did she ask, “Do we have enough funding?”
questionnaires
A questionnaire—a series of questions on a particular topic sent out to
a number of people—serves the same function as an interview but does
so on paper, as an e-mailattachment, or as an online form. As you pre-
pare a questionnaire, therefore, keep in mind your purposeand your in-
tended audience. See also interviewing for informationand research.
Questionnaires have several advantages over the personal interview
as well as several disadvantages.
ADVANTAGES
• A questionnaire allows you to gather information from more
Q
people more quickly than you could by conducting personal
interviews.
• It enables you to obtain responses from people who are difficult
to reach or who are in various geographic locations.
• Those responding to a questionnaire have more time to think
through their answers than when faced with the pressure of
composing thoughtful and complete answers to an interviewer.
• The questionnaire may yield more objective data because it reduces
the possibility that the interviewer’s tone of voice or facial expres-
sions might influence an answer.
• The cost of distributing and tabulating a questionnaire is lower
than the cost of conducting numerous personal interviews.

=== Page 471 ===
6860ch0Q.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 438
438 questionnaires
DISADVANTAGES
• The results of a questionnaire may be slanted in favor of those
people who have strong opinions on a subject because they are
more likely to respond than those with only moderate views.
• The questionnaire does not allow specific follow-up questions
to answers; at best, a questionnaire can be designed to let one
question lead logically to another.
• Distributing questionnaires and waiting for replies may take
considerably longer than conducting personal interviews.
The sample cover memo and questionnaire in Figure Q–1 were sent
to employees in a large organization who had participated in a six-
month program of flexible working hours.
Selecting the Recipients
Selecting the proper recipients for your questionnaire is crucial if you
are to gather representative and usable data. If you wanted to survey
the opinions of large groups in the general population—for example,
all medical technologists working in private laboratories or all indepen-
dent garage owners—your task would not be easy. Because you cannot
include everybody in your survey, you need to choose a representative
cross section. For example, you would want to include enough people
from around the country, respondents of both genders, and people with
different educational backgrounds. Only then could you make a gener-
alized statement based on your findings from the sample. (The best
sources of information on sampling techniques are market research and
statistics texts.)
WEB LINK Online Surveys
Q
Surveymonkey.com offers help for designing online surveys as well as
collecting and analyzing the results.For links to this site and more,see
bedfordstmartins.com/alredtechand selectLinks for Handbook Entries.
Preparing the Questions
A key goal in designing the questionnaire is to keep it as brief as pos-
sible. The longer a questionnaire is, the less likely the recipient will be
to complete and return it. Also, the questions should be easy to under-
stand. A confusing question will yield confusing results, whereas a care-
fully worded question will be easy to answer. Ideally, recipients should
be able to answer most questions with a “yes” or “no” or by checking
or circling a choice among several options. Such answers are easy to

=== Page 472 ===
6860ch0Q.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 439
questionnaires 439
Luxwear Products Corporation
MEMO
To: All Company Employees
From: Nelson Barrett, Director NB
Human Resources Department
Date: October 19, 2009
Subject: Review of Flexible Working Hours Program
Please complete and return the questionnaire enclosed regarding
Luxwear’s trial program of flexible working hours. Your answers
will help us decide whether we should make the program per-
manent.
Return the completed questionnaire to Ken Rose, Mail Code
12B,by October 28.Your signature on the questionnaire is not
necessary. All responses will be confidential and given serious
consideration. Feel free to raise additional issues pertaining to
the program.
If you want to discuss any item in the questionnaire, call Pam
Peters in the Human Resources Department at extension 8812
or e-mail at pp1@lpc.com.
Enclosure: Questionnaire
Q
FIGUREQ–1. Questionnaire (Cover Memo)

=== Page 473 ===
6860ch0Q.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 440
440 questionnaires
Flexible Working Hours Program
Questionnaire
1. What kind of position do you occupy?
(cid:3) Supervisory
(cid:3) Nonsupervisory
2. Indicate to the nearest quarter of an hour your starting time under flextime.
(cid:3) 7:00 a.m. (cid:3) 8:15 a.m.
(cid:3) 7:15 a.m. (cid:3) 8:30 a.m.
(cid:3) 7:30 a.m. (cid:3) 8:45 a.m.
(cid:3) 7:45 a.m. (cid:3) 9:00 a.m.
(cid:3) 8:00 a.m. (cid:3) Other (specify)
3. Where do you live?
(cid:3) Talbot County (cid:3) Greene County
(cid:3) Montgomery County (cid:3) Other (specify)
4. How do you usually travel to work?
(cid:3) Drive alone (cid:3) Walk
(cid:3) Bus (cid:3) Car pool
(cid:3) Train (cid:3) Motorcycle
(cid:3) Bicycle (cid:3) Other (specify)
5. Has flextime affected your commuting time?
(cid:3) Increase: Approximate number of minutes
(cid:3) Decrease: Approximate number of minutes
(cid:3) No change
6. If you drive alone or in a car pool, has flextime increased or decreased the
Q amount of time it takes you to find a parking space?
(cid:3) Increased (cid:3) Decreased (cid:3) No change
7. Has flextime had an effect on your productivity?
a. Quality of work
(cid:3) Increased (cid:3) Decreased (cid:3) No change
b. Accuracy of work
(cid:3) Increased (cid:3) Decreased (cid:3) No change
c. Quiet time for uninterrupted work
(cid:3) Increased (cid:3) Decreased (cid:3) No change
FIGUREQ–1. Questionnaire (continued)

=== Page 474 ===
6860ch0Q.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 441
questionnaires 441
8. Have you had difficulty getting in touch with coworkers who are on different
work schedules from yours?
(cid:3) Yes (cid:3) No
9. Have you had trouble scheduling meetings within flexible starting and quit-
ting times?
(cid:3) Yes (cid:3) No
10. Has flextime affected the way you feel about your job?
(cid:3) Yes (cid:3) No
If yes, please answer (a) or (b):
a. Feel better about job
(cid:3) Slightly (cid:3) Considerably
b. Feel worse about job
(cid:3) Slightly (cid:3) Considerably
11. How important is it for you to have flexibility in your working hours?
(cid:3) Very (cid:3) Not very (cid:3) Somewhat (cid:3) Not at all
12. Has flextime allowed you more time to be with your family?
(cid:3) Yes (cid:3) No
13. If you are responsible for the care of a young child or children, has flextime
made it easier or more difficult for you to obtain babysitting or day-care ser-
vices?
(cid:3) Easier (cid:3) More difficult (cid:3) No change
Q
14. Do you recommend that the flextime program be made permanent?
(cid:3) Yes (cid:3) No
15. Please describe below or on an attached sheet any major changes you recom-
mend for the program.
Thank you for your assistance.
FIGUREQ–1. Questionnaire (continued)

=== Page 475 ===
6860ch0Q.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 442
442 questionnaires
tabulate and require minimum effort on the part of the respondent,
thus increasing your chances of obtaining a response. See also forms.
(cid:2) Do you recommend that the flextime program be made
permanent?
□ □ □
Yes No No opinion
If you need more information than such questions produce, provide an
appropriate range of answers, as in the following example:
(cid:2) How many hours of overtime would you be willing to work each
week?
□ □ □
4 hours 8 hours Over 10 hours
□ □ □
6 hours 10 hours No overtime
Questions should be neutral; they should not be worded in such a way
as to lead respondents to give a particular answer, which can result in
inaccurate or skewed data.
SLANTED Would you prefer the freedom of a four-day workweek?
NEUTRAL Would you choose to work a four-day workweek, ten
hours a day, with every Friday off?
WRITER’S CHECKLIST Designing a Questionnaire
(cid:5)
Prepare a cover letter(or a memo or an e-mail) explaining who you
are,the questionnaire’s purpose,the date by which you need a re-
sponse,and how and where to send the completed questionnaire.
(cid:5)
Include a stamped,self-addressed envelope if you are using regular
Q
mail.
(cid:5)
Constructas many questions as possible for which the recipientdoes
nothave to compose an answer.
(cid:5)
Include a section on the questionnaire for additional comments
where the recipientmay clarify his or her overall attitude toward the
subject.
(cid:5)
Include questions aboutthe respondent’s age,gender,education,
occupation,and so on,only if such information will be of value in
interpreting the answers.
(cid:5)
State whether the information provided as well as the recipient’s
identity will be keptconfidential.
(cid:5)
Include your contactinformation (mailing address,phone number,
and e-mail address).

=== Page 476 ===
6860ch0Q.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 443
quotation marks 443
Writer’s Checklist:Designing a Questionnaire (continued)
(cid:5)
Consider offering some tangible appreciation to those who answer
the questionnaire by a specific date,such as a copy of the results or,
for a customer questionnaire,a giftcertificate.
quid pro quo
Quid pro quo, which is Latin for “one thing for another,” suggests mu-
tual cooperation or “tit for tat” in a relationship between two groups
or individuals. The term may be appropriate to business and legal con-
texts if you are sure your readers understand its meaning. (“Before ap-
proving the plan, we insisted on a fair quid pro quo.”) See also foreign
words in English.
quotation marks
Quotation marks (“ ”) are used to enclose a direct quotation of spoken
or written words. Quotation marks have other special uses, but they
should not be used for emphasis.
DirectQuotations
Enclose in quotation marks anything that is quoted word for word (a
direct quotation) from speech or written material.
(cid:2) She said clearly, “I want the progress report by three o’clock.”
Do not enclose indirect quotations—usually introduced by the word
Q
that—in quotation marks. Indirect quotations are paraphrases of a
writer’s or speaker’s words or ideas. See also paraphrasing.
(cid:2) She said that she wanted the progress report by three o’clock.
ETHICS NOTE When you use quotation marks to indicate that you are
quoting, do not make any changes or omissions in the quoted material
unless you clearly indicate what you have done. For further information
on incorporating quoted material and inserting comments, see plagia-
rismand quotations. ✦
Use single quotation marks (‘ ’) to enclose a quotation that appears
within a quotation.
(cid:2) John said, “Jane told me that she was going to ‘stay with the
project if it takes all year.’”

=== Page 477 ===
6860ch0Q.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 444
444 quotation marks
Words and Phrases
Use quotation marks to set off special words or terms only to point out
that the term is used in context for a unique or special purpose (that is,
in the sense of the term so-called).
(cid:2) A remarkable chain of events caused the sinking of the “unsink-
able” Titanicon its maiden voyage.
Slang, colloquial expressions, and attempts at humor, although infre-
quent in workplace writing, should seldom be set off by quotation marks.
shakedown cruise.
(cid:2) Our first six months amounted to a “shakedown cruise.”
^
Titles of Works
Use quotation marks to enclose titles of reports, short stories, articles,
essays, single episodes of radio and television programs, and short mu-
sical works (including songs). However, do not use quotation marks for
titles of books and periodicals, which should appear in italics.
(cid:2) His report, “Effects of Government Regulations on Motorcycle
Safety,” cited the article “No-Fault Insurance and Motorcycles,”
published in American Motorcyclistmagazine.
Use quotation marks for parts of publications, such as chapters of
books and articles or sections within periodicals.
(cid:2) “Bad Writing,” an article by Barbara Wallraff, appeared in the
“On Language” column of the New York Times.
Some titles, by convention, are not set off by quotation marks, under-
lining, or italics, although they are capitalized.
Q
(cid:2) Professional Writing [college course title], the Bible, the Constitu-
tion, Lincoln’s Gettysburg Address, the Lands’ End Catalog
Punctuation
Commasand periodsalways go inside closing quotation marks.
(cid:2) “Reading Computer Worldgives me the insider’s view,” he says,
adding, “It’s like a conversation with the top experts.”
Semicolonsand colonsalways go outside closing quotation marks.
(cid:2) He said, “I will pay the full amount”; this statement surprised us.
All other punctuation follows the logic of the context: If the punctua-
tion is part of the material quoted, it goes inside the quotation marks; if

=== Page 478 ===
6860ch0Q.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 445
quotations 445
the punctuation is not part of the material quoted, it goes outside the
quotation marks.
quotations
Using direct and indirect quotations is an effective way to make or sup-
port a point. However, avoid the temptation to overquote during the
note-taking phase of your research; concentrate on summarizing what
you read.
ETHICS NOTE When you use a quotation (or an idea of another writer),
cite your source properly. If you do not, you will be guilty of plagiarism.
For specific details on citation systems, see documenting sources. ✦
DirectQuotations
A direct quotation is a word-for-word copy of the text of an original
source. Choose direct quotations (which can be of a word, a phrase, a
sentence, or, occasionally, a paragraph) carefully and use them spar-
ingly. Enclose direct quotations in quotation marks and separate them
from the rest of the sentence by a comma or colon. Use the initial capi-
tal letter of a quotation if the quoted material originally began with a
capital letter.
(cid:2) The Dean of the Medical College stated, “We must attract more
students to careers in medicine in order to meet the health-care
needs of older Americans.”
When dividing a quotation, set off the material that interrupts the quo-
tation with commas, and use quotation marks around each part of the
Q
quotation.
(cid:2) “We must attract more students to careers in medicine,” he said in
a recent interview, “in order to meet the health-care needs of older
Americans.”
IndirectQuotations
An indirect quotation is a paraphrased version of an original text. It is
usually introduced by the word that and is not set off from the rest of
the sentence by punctuation marks. See also paraphrasing.
(cid:2) In an interview, he said thatrecruiting students to medical
schools is essential to meeting the health-care demands of older
Americans.

=== Page 479 ===
6860ch0Q.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 446
446 quotations
Deletions or Omissions
Deletions or omissions from quoted material are indicated by three el-
lipsis points (...) within a sentence and a period plus three ellipsis
points (....) at the end of a sentence.
ORIGINAL “Their touchstones, which to an outsider might appear
as arbitrary and simplistic, were developed through
highly specific research using both internal and outside
expertise, distilled from a complex historical process of
examining rhetorical variables, and documented as op-
erational guidelines rather than narratives of processes
or of theoretical models.”
WITH “Their touchstones...were developed through highly
ELLIPSES specific research using both internal and outside ex-
pertise, distilled from a complex historical process of
examining rhetorical variables, and documented as
operational guidelines....”
When a quoted passage begins in the middle of a sentence rather than
at the beginning, ellipsis points are not necessary; the fact that the first
letter of the quoted material is not capitalized tells the reader that the
quotation begins in midsentence.
(cid:2) Rivero goes on to conclude that “the Research and Development
Center is essential to keeping high-tech companies in the state.”
Inserting Material into Quotations
When it is necessary to insert a clarifying comment within quoted mate-
rial, use brackets.
Q (cid:2) “The industry is an integrated system that serves an extensive [geo-
graphic] area, with divisions existing as islands within the larger
system’s sphere of influence.”
When quoted material contains an obvious error or might be ques-
tioned in some other way, insert the expression sic(Latin for “thus”) in
italic type and enclose it in brackets ([sic]) following the questionable
material to indicate that the writer has quoted the material exactly as it
appeared in the original.
(cid:2) The company considers the Baker Foundation to be a “guilt-edged
[sic] investment.”
Incorporating Quotations into Text
Quote word for word only when a source with particular expertise states
something that is especially precise, striking, or noteworthy, or that may

=== Page 480 ===
6860ch0Q.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 447
quotations 447
reinforce a point you are making. Quotations must also logically, gram-
matically, and syntactically match the rest of the sentence and sur-
rounding text. Notice in Figure Q–2 that the quotation blends with the
content of the surrounding text, which uses transitionto introduce and
comment on the quotation.
After reviewing a large number of works on technical communi-
cation, Alred sees differences in the focus of practitioners and
educators:
Some works, for example, are essential to the immediate
needs of professional technical communicators who face
specific and demanding workplace tasks under tight dead-
lines. Other works are crucial to educators who must be
concerned with the long-range implications of research or
theoretical insights as they prepare students for professional
careers in technical communication. (p. 586)
The aims of practitioners and educators, however, are not as distinct
as this statement by itself might suggest. For example, many prac-
ticing technical communicators, as they design Web pages or
produce documentation, see themselves as educators. Specifically,
in preparing material for users of systems, practitioners must...
FIGUREQ–2. Long Quotation (APA Style)
Depending on the citation system, the style of incorporating quota-
tions varies. For examples of three different styles, see documenting
sources. Figure Q–2 shows APA style for a long quotation. At the end
of the document, the following entry would appear in the APA-style list Q
of references as the source of the quotation in Figure Q–2.
(cid:2) Alred, G. J. (2003). Essential works on technical communication.
Technical Communication, 50, 585–616.
Do not rely too heavily on the use of quotations in the final version of
your document. Generally, avoid quoting anything that is longer than
one paragraph.

=== Page 481 ===
6860ch0R.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 448
R
raise / rise
Both raiseand risemean “move to a higher position.” However, raiseis
a transitive verb and always takes an object (“raise crops”), whereas
riseis an intransitive verb and never takes an object (“heat rises”).
re
Re(and its variant form, in re) is business and legal jargonmeaning “in
reference to” or “in the case of.” Although re is sometimes used in
memosand e-mails, subjectis a preferable term.
readers
The first rule of effective writing is to help your readers. If you overlook
this commitment, your writing will not achieve its purpose, either for
you or for your business or organization. For meeting the needs of both
individual and multiple readers, see audience.
really
R
Reallyis an adverbmeaning “actually” or “in fact.” Although both re-
ally and actually are often used as intensifiers for emphasis or sarcasm
in speech, avoid such use in writing.
(cid:2) Did he reallyfinish the report on time?
reason is [because]
Replace the redundant phrase the reason is because with the reason is
thator simply because. See also conciseness.
448

=== Page 482 ===
6860ch0R.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 449
refusal letters 449
reference letters
Writing a reference letter (or letter of recommendation) can range from
completing an admission form for a prospective student to composing a
detailed description of professional accomplishments and personal
characteristics for someone seeking employment. In Figure R–1, a for-
mer employer has written a letter for someone who is seeking an ad-
vanced position as a researcher.
To write an effective letter of recommendation, you must be famil-
iar enough with the applicant’s abilities and performance to offer an
evaluation, and you must keep in mind the following:
• Identify yourself by name, title or position, employer, and address.
• Respond directly to the inquiry, carefully addressing the specific
questions asked.
• Address specifically the applicant’s skills, abilities, knowledge, and
character, guided by the person’s résuméwhen possible.
• Communicate truthfully and without embellishment.
You could begin, as in Figure R–1, by stating the circumstances of your
acquaintance and how long you have known the person for whom you
are writing the letter. Mention, with as much substantiation as possible,
one or two outstanding characteristics of the applicant. Organize the
details in your letter using the decreasing order-of-importance method
of development. Conclude with a brief summary of the applicant’s qual-
ifications and a clear statement of recommendation. See correspondence
for letter format and general advice.
ETHICS NOTE When you are asked to serve as a reference or to supply
a letter of reference, be aware that applicants have a legal right to ex-
amine what you have written about them, unless they sign a waiver. ✦
R
refusal letters
A refusal delivers a negative message (or bad news) in the form of a let-
ter, a memo, or an e-mail. The ideal refusal says “no” in such a way
that you not only avoid antagonizing your reader but also maintain
goodwill. See also audience.
When the stakes are high, you must convince your reader before
you present the bad news that your reasons for refusing are logical or
understandable. (See also correspondence.) Stating a negative message
in your opening may cause your reader to react too quickly and dismiss

=== Page 483 ===
6860ch0R.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 450
450 reference letters
CITYOFSPRINGFIELD
LEGISLATIVEREFERENCEBUREAU
200 EASTMAINSTREET
SPRINGFIELD, AK 99501
(414) 224-5555
January 12, 2009
Mr. Phillip Lester
Human Resources Director
Thompson Enterprises
201 State Street
St. Louis, MO 63102
Dear Mr. Lester:
How long As Kerry Hawkin’s former employer, I am happy to have the oppor-
writer has tunity to recommend her. I’ve known Kerry for five years, first as
known ap- an intern in our office and for two years as a full-time research as-
plicantand sociate. This past year she has remained in contact as she completed
the circum-
graduate school.
stances
Our office is the official research arm for the Springfield City
Council, so we approved Kerry as an intern not only because of her
outstanding grades but also because the university internship coor-
dinator reported that she possessed excellent research skills. Kerry
Outstand- proved her worth in our office as an intern and was offered a full-
ing charac- time position as a research associate to work on projects under my
teristics of supervision. I found Kerry not only to be a careful researcher but
applicant also to be able to complete her assignments on schedule within tight
deadlines. The material provided in her well-written reports unfail-
ingly met the requirements for my work and more. During her time
in our office, Kerry also proved herself to be a most valued colleague.
I strongly recommend Kerry for her ability to work independently,
to organize her time efficiently, and to write clearly and articulately.
R
I regret that we have no position to offer her at this time. Please do
nothesitate to let me know if I can provide further information.
Sincerely yours,
Recommen-
dation and Michelle Paul
summary
of qualifi-
Michelle Paul, Manager
cations
mpaul@springfield.ar.gov
FIGURER–1. Reference Letter

=== Page 484 ===
6860ch0R.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 451
refusal letters 451
your explanation. The following pattern, used in the message shown in
Figure R–2, is an effective way to handle this problem:
1. Open with contextfor the message (often called a “buffer”).
2. Review the facts or details leading to the refusal or bad news.
3. Give the negative message based on the facts or details.
4. Close by establishing or reestablishing a positive relationship.
From: Ted Richardson <tedr@crb.com>
To: Javier Lopez <lopez@tnco.com>
Sent: Monday,February 23,2009 10:47 AM
Subject: Regional Meeting Speech
Dear Mr.Lopez:
Context I am honored to have been invited to address your regional
meeting in St.Louis on May 18.Thatyou would consider me as
a potential contributor to such a gathering of experts is indeed
flattering.
Review of On checking my schedule,I find thatI will be attending the an-
facts and nual meeting of our parentcorporation’s Board of Directors on
refusal thatdate.Therefore,as much as I would enjoy addressing your
members,I mustdecline.
Goodwill I have been very favorably impressed over the years with your
close organization’s contributions to the engineering profession,and
I would welcome the opportunity to participate in a future
meeting.
Sincerely,
Ted Richardson
R
FIGURER–2. Refusal Letter (Sentas E-mail)
Your opening should provide an appropriate context and establish
a professional tone, for example by expressing appreciation for a
reader’s time, effort, or interest.
(cid:2) The Screening Procedures Committee appreciates the time and
effort you spent on your proposal for a new security-clearance
procedure.

=== Page 485 ===
6860ch0R.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 452
452 refusal letters
Next, review the circumstances of the situation sympathetically by plac-
ing yourself in the reader’s position. Clearly detail the reasons you can-
not do what the reader wants—even though you have not yet said you
cannot do it. A good explanation, as shown in the following example,
should ideally detail the reasons for your refusal so thoroughly that the
reader will accept the negative message as a logical conclusion.
(cid:2) We reviewed the potential effects of implementing your proposed
security-clearance procedure company-wide. We not only asked the
Security Systems Department to review the data but also surveyed
industry practices, sought the views of senior management, and
submitted the idea to our legal staff. As a result of this process,
we have reached the following conclusions:
• The cost savings you project are correct only if the procedure
could be required throughout the company.
• The components of your procedure are legal, but most are not
widely accepted by our industry.
• Based on our survey, some components could alienate em-
ployees who would perceive them as violating an individual’s
rights.
• Enforcing company-wide use would prove costly and
impractical.
Do not belabor the negative message—state your refusal quickly, clearly,
and as positively as possible.
(cid:2) For those reasons, the committee recommends that divisions con-
tinue their current security-screening procedures.
Close your message in a way that reestablishes goodwill—do not re-
peat the bad news (avoid writing “Again, we are sorry we cannot use
your idea”). Ideally, provide an alternative, as in the following:
R (cid:2) Because some components of your procedure may apply in certain
circumstances, we would like to feature your ideas in the next
issue of The Guardian. I have asked the editor to contact you next
week. On behalf of the committee, thank you for the thoughtful
proposal.
If such an option is not possible or reasonable, offer a friendly remark
that anticipates a positive future relationship, assure the reader of your
high opinion of his or her product or service, or merely wish the reader
success.
For responding to a complaint, see adjustmentletters. For refusing
a job offer, see acceptance / refusal letters.

=== Page 486 ===
6860ch0R.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 453
repetition 453
regarding / with regard to
In regards to and with regards to are incorrect idioms for in regard
to and with regard to. Both as regards and regarding are acceptable
variants.
regard
(cid:2) In regardsto your last question, I think a meeting is a good idea.
^
Regarding
(cid:2) With regards toyour last question, I think a meeting is a good idea.
^
regardless
Always use regardless instead of the nonstandard irregardless, which
expresses a double negative. The prefix ir- renders the base word nega-
tive, but regardlessis already negative, meaning “unmindful.”
repetition
The deliberate use of repetition to build a sustained effect or to empha-
size a feeling or an idea can be a powerful device. See also emphasis.
(cid:2) Similarly, atoms come and goin a molecule, but the molecule re-
mains; molecules come and goin a cell, but the cell remains; cells
come and goin a body, but the body remains; persons come and
goin an organization, but the organization remains.
—Kenneth Boulding, Beyond Economics
R
Repeating keywords from a previous sentence or paragraph can also be
used effectively to achieve transition.
(cid:2) For many years, oilhas been a major industrial energy source.
However, oilsupplies are limited, and other sources of energy
must be developed.
Be consistent in the word or phrase you use to refer to something. In
technical writing, it is generally better to repeat a word or use a clear
pronoun reference (so readers know that you mean the same thing)
than to use synonymsto avoid repetition. See also affectation.

=== Page 487 ===
6860ch0R.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 454
454 reports
SYNONYMS Several recent analysessupport our conclusion.
These studiescast doubt on the feasibility of
long-range forecasting. The reports, however,
are strictly theoretical.
CONSISTENT TERMS Several recent studiessupport our conclusion.
These studiescast doubt on the feasibility of
long-range forecasting. Theyare, however,
strictly theoretical.
Purposeless repetition, however, makes a sentence awkward and
hides its key ideas. See also conciseness.
(cid:2) She said that the customer said that hewas canceling the order.
reports
A report is an organized presentation of factual information, often
aimed at multiple audiences, that may present the results of an investi-
gation, a trip, or a research project. For any report—whether formal or
informal—assessing the readers’ needs is essential. Following is a list of
report entries in this book:
feasibility reports 185 progress and activity reports 402
formal reports 195 testreports 527
investigative reports 281 trip reports 539
laboratory reports 293 trouble reports 541
Formal reports often present the results of long-term projects or those
that involve multiple participants. (See also collaborative writing.) Such
projects may be done either for your own organization or as a contrac-
tual requirement for another organization. Formal reports generally fol-
low a precise format and include such elements as abstracts and
R executive summaries. See also proposals.
Informal and short reports normally run from a few paragraphs to
a few pages and ordinarily include only an introduction, a body, a con-
clusion, and (if necessary) recommendations. Because of their brevity,
informal reports are customarily written as correspondence, including
letters(if sent outside your organization), memos, and e-mails.
The introduction announces the subject of the report, states its
purpose, and gives any essential background information. It may also
summarize the conclusions, findings, or recommendations made in the
report. The body presents a clearly organized account of the report’s
subject—the results of a test carried out, the status of a project, and
other details readers may need. The amount of detail to include de-
pends on your reader’s knowledge and the complexity of the subject.

=== Page 488 ===
6860ch0R.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 455
repurposing 455
The conclusion summarizes your findings and interprets their sig-
nificance for readers. In some reports, a final, separate section gives rec-
ommendations; in others, the conclusions and the recommendations are
combined into one section. This final section makes suggestions for a
course of action based on the data you have presented. See also per-
suasion.
repurposing
Repurposing is the copying or converting of existing content, such as
written text and visuals, from one document or medium into another
for a different purpose.* For example, if you are preparing a promo-
tional brochure, you may be able to reuse material from a product
description that is currently published on your organization’s Web site.
The brochure may then be printed or even placed on the Web site where
it can be downloaded. See also selectingthe medium.
In the workplace, this process saves time because content that often
requires substantial effort to develop need not be re-created for each
new application. The process of repurposing may be as simple as copy-
ing and pasting content from one document into another or as com-
plex as distributing content and updates through a system of content
management.
Content can be repurposed exactly as it is written only if it fits the
scope, audience, and purpose of the new document. If the content alters
these areas, you must adapt the content to fit its new context, as de-
scribed in the following sections.
Repurpose for the Context
Staying focused on the purpose of your new document is critical, espe-
cially when repurposing content between different media. If you are
writing a sales proposal, for example, and you only need to describe the R
specificationsfor a product, it may be useful to repurpose the specifica-
tion list from your organization’s Web site. However, the purpose of the
Web-site content may be to inform customers about your products,
whereas the purpose of a proposal is to persuadecustomers to buy your
products. To effectively use the repurposed content in your proposal,
you may need to adapt the tense, voice, tone, grammar, and pointof
viewto make the repurposed content more persuasive and fit within the
context of a sales proposal.
*The reuse of standard texts or content in technical publications is often referred to
as “single-source publishing” or simply “single sourcing.” See www.stcsig.org/ss/. Tra-
ditionally, such reuse of standard texts has been referred to as “boilerplate.”

=== Page 489 ===
6860ch0R.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 456
456 requests for proposals
Repurpose for the Medium
The proper style and format of content written for a specific medium,
such as a brochure or fact sheet, may not work as effectively when re-
purposed into a different medium, such as a Web site. Solid blocks of
text may be easy to read in a brochure, but Web readers often need
blocks of text to be separated into bulleted lists or very short para-
graphs because readers process information differently when reading on
a computer monitor. Adapt the layout and design of the repurposed
content as appropriate to accommodate your reader’s needs for the
medium. See also writing for the Web.
ETHICS NOTE In the workplace, repurposing content within an organi-
zation does not violate copyright because an organization owns the in-
formation it creates and can share it across the company. Likewise, a
writer in an organization may use and repurpose material in the public
domain and, with some limitations, content that is licensed under Cre-
ative Commons at http://creativecommons.org/about/. See also blogs
and Digital Tip: Wikis for Collaborative Documentson page 72.
In the classroom, of course, the use of content or someone else’s
unique ideas without acknowledgment or the use of someone else’s
exact words without quotation marks and appropriate credit is pla-
giarism. ✦
requests for proposals
When a company or another organization needs a task performed or a
service provided outside its staff expertise or capabilities, it seeks help
from vendors. The company seeking help usually makes its require-
ments known by issuing a request for proposals (RFP) for vendors to
evaluate and decide whether to bid on the project.
Although RFPs lay out an organization’s requirements, they usually
R
do not specify how these requirements are to be met.* Potential ven-
dors prepare proposals to describe their solutions for meeting an RFP’s
requirements.
RFP Structure
Like proposals, RFPs vary in length and structure. The scope of infor-
mation and even the terminology used will vary with the task or service
*A related document is an invitation for bids (IFB). An IFB specifically defines the
quantity, type, and specifications for an item that an organization intends to pur-
chase.

=== Page 490 ===
6860ch0R.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:54 AM Page 457
requests for proposals 457
being solicited. The purpose and context of RFPs also vary because
each involves unique legal, budgetary, confidentiality, and administra-
tive considerations. The following sections describe typical components
for RFPs.
Information AboutYour Company. One section should describe your
company’s mission, goals, size, facility locations, and position in the
marketplace, as well as provide your company contact information.
This section parallels the “Description of Vendor” section in proposals
(see Figure P–8, page 431).
Project Description. Another section, sometimes called “Scope of
Work” or “Workscope Description,” describes the deliverable (the proj-
ect or service) you need, with a detailed list of requirements. Require-
ments can be described in a summary statement, as shown in the fol-
lowing examples:
(cid:2) The project deliverable will be a questionnaire to be mailed to ap-
proximately 400 adults regarding their consumer experiences with
various health-care providers....
(cid:2) The deliverable will be a networked online forms package for
approximately 1,200 employees, enabling information to be com-
pleted online, stored in a database, routed via e-mail, and printed
on paper. The package shall be integrated into the company’s cur-
rent network environment at its headquarters....
The project description may also indicate whether the deliverable must
be created new or obtained commercially and adapted to the project’s
needs, as for software development. This section can also specify other
details, such as a project-management plan and any warranty or liabil-
ity requirements.
R
Delivery Schedule. For complex projects lasting a month or longer,
specify the time allotted for the project and a proposed schedule of
tasks.
Proposal Description. An RFP may provide format requirements;
number of copies expected; due date; and where, to whom, and how
(registered mail, courier service, etc.) it should be sent. If an electronic
file is required, some firms include an electronic template.
Vendor Qualifications. Most RFPs request a summary of the vendor’s
experience, professional certifications, number of employees, years in

=== Page 491 ===
6860ch0R.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:55 AM Page 458
458 requests for proposals
business, quality-control procedures, awards and honors, and the ré-
sumés of the principal employees assigned to the project.
Proposal-Evaluation Criteria. The proposal-evaluation section in-
forms vendors of the firm’s selection criteria. They may select a firm
solely on cost, cost and vendor past performance, or technical expertise.
Some firms grade proposals with a point system on a scale of 100 or
1,000 total points, as in the following sample:
(cid:2) Proposal-Evaluation Criteria
CRITERIA POINTS
Administrative 50
Technical 700
Management 100
Price 100
Presentation and 50
demonstration
Total 1,000
Appendixes. Some RFPs include one or more appendixes or “Attach-
ments” for sample forms and questionnaires, a sample contract, a com-
pany’s server and workstation configurations, workflow-analysis
diagrams, dates and times when vendors can visit the work site before
finalizing their proposals, and other essentials too detailed for the body
of the RFP.
ETHICS NOTE If your RFP contains any company-confidential informa-
tion, you could include a legally binding nondisclosure statement for ven-
dors to sign before you send the full RFP. Many companies also include a
R
guarantee not to open proposals before the due date and never to disclose
information in one vendor’s proposal to a competing vendor. ✦
WEB LINK Sample Requestfor Proposals
To view the RFP thataccompanies the sample proposal in Figure P–8,
see bedfordstmartins.com/alredtechand selectModel Documents
Gallery.

=== Page 492 ===
6860ch0R.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:55 AM Page 459
research 459
research
DIRECTORY
Primary Research 459
Secondary Research 460
Library Research Strategies 460
Online Catalogs (Locating Books) 461
Online Databases and Indexes (Locating Articles) 461
Reference Works 462
InternetResearch Strategies 463
Search Engines 464
Writer’s Checklist:Using Search Engines and Keywords 464
Web SubjectDirectories 465
Evaluating Sources 465
Writer’s Checklist:Evaluating Printand Online Sources 466
Research is the process of investigation—the discovery of information.
To be focused, research must be preceded by preparation, especially
consideration of your audience, purpose, and scope. During your re-
search, effective note-takingis essential for a coherent organizationthat
strategically integrates your own ideas, supporting facts, and any well-
selected quotationsinto an effective final document. See also document-
ing sources, outlining, and “Five Steps to Successful Writing.”
In an academic setting, your preparatory resources include conver-
sations with your peers, instructors, and especially a reference librarian.
On the job, your main resources are your own knowledge and experi-
ence and that of your colleagues. In the workplace, the most important
sources of information may also include testreports, laboratory reports,
and the like. In this setting, begin by brainstorming with colleagues
about what sources will be most useful to your topic and how you can
find them.
Primary Research R
Primary research is the gathering of raw data from such sources as first-
hand experience, interviews, direct observation, surveys and question-
naires, experiments, meetings, and the like. In fact, direct observation
and interaction are the only ways to obtain certain kinds of information,
such as about human and animal behavior, certain natural phenomena,
and the operation of systems and equipment. You can also conduct pri-
mary research on the Internet by participating in discussion groups and
newsgroups and by using e-mailto request information from specific au-
diences. See also interviewing for informationand listening.

=== Page 493 ===
6860ch0R.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:55 AM Page 460
460 research
ETHICS NOTE If you are planning research that involves observation,
choose your sites and times carefully, and be sure to obtain permission
in advance. During your observations, remain as unobtrusive as pos-
sible, and keep accurate, complete records that indicate date, time of
day, duration of the observation, and so on. Save interpretations of
your observations for future analysis. Be aware that observation can be
valuable research, but it may also be time-consuming, complicated, and
expensive. You may also inadvertently influence the subjects you are
observing. ✦
Secondary Research
Secondary research is the gathering of information that has been previ-
ously analyzed, assessed, evaluated, compiled, or otherwise organized
into accessible form. Sources include books and articles as well as re-
ports, Web documents, audio and video recordings, podcasts, corre-
spondence, minutes of meetings, brochures, and so forth. The following
two sections—Library Research Strategies and Internet Research
Strategies—provide methods for finding secondary sources.
As you seek information, keep in mind that in most cases the more
recent the information, the better. Recently published periodicals and
newspapers—as well as academic (.edu), organizational (.org), and
government (.gov) Web sites—can be good sources of current informa-
tion and can include published interviews, articles, papers, and confer-
ence proceedings. See Writer’s Checklist: Evaluating Print and Online
Sourceson page 466.
When a resource seems useful, read it carefully and take notes that
include any additional questions about your topic. Some of your ques-
tions may eventually be answered in other sources; those that remain
unanswered can guide you to further primary research. For example,
you may discover that you need to interview an expert. Not only can
someone skilled in a field answer many of your questions, but he or she
can also suggest further sources of information. See paraphrasing and
R
plagiarism.
Library Research Strategies
The library provides organized paths into scholarship and the Internet
as well as specialized resources—such as licensed online databases, in-
dexes, catalogs, and directories—that can help you find current, reli-
able information. The first step in using library resources, either in an
academic institution or in a workplace, is to develop a search strategy
appropriate to the information needed for your topic. You may want to
begin by asking a reference librarian for help (in person, by phone, by
live chat, or by e-mail) to find the best print or online resources for your

=== Page 494 ===
6860ch0R.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:55 AM Page 461
research 461
topic—a brief conversation can focus your research and save you time.
In addition, use your library’s homepage for access to its catalogs, data-
bases of articles, subject directories to the Web, and more.
Your search strategy depends on the kind of information you are
seeking. For example, if you need the latest data offered by government
research, check the Web, as described later in this entry. Likewise, if you
need a current scholarly article on a topic, search an online database
(such as EBSCOhost’s Academic Search Premier) subscribed to by your
library. For an overview of a subject, you might turn to an encyclope-
dia; for historical background, your best resources are books, journals,
and primary documents (such as a technical specification).
Online Catalogs (Locating Books). An online catalog—accessed
through library research terminals and through the Internet—allows
you to search a library’s licensed holdings, indicates an item’s location
and availability, and may allow you to arrange an interlibrary loan.
You can search a library’s online catalog by author, title, keyword,
or subject. The most common ways of searching for a specific topic are
by subject or by keyword. If your search turns up too many results, you
can usually narrow it by using the “limit search” or “advanced search”
option.
Online Databases and Indexes (Locating Articles). Most libraries sub-
scribe to online databases, such as the following, which are often avail-
able through a library’s Web site:
• EBSCOhost’s Academic Search Premier: the largest academic mul-
tidisciplinary database, which provides full text for nearly 4,600
scholarly publications, including more than 3,500 peer-reviewed
journals.
• InfoTrac: a large database that hosts general-interest and scholarly
journals and resources in business, law, health, and other fields.
R
• ProQuest: a collection of databases, including newspapers and
scholarly journals, in a wide range of subject areas.
• FirstSearch: a collection of specialized databases, such as WorldCat
(library collections) and ArticleFirst.
• Lexis/Nexis Academic: a collection of databases containing news,
business, legal, medical, and government information.
These databases, sometimes called periodical indexes, are excellent re-
sources for articles published within the last 10 to 20 years. Many
include descriptive abstracts and full texts of articles. To find older ar-
ticles, you may need to consult a print index, such as the Readers’ Guide

=== Page 495 ===
6860ch0R.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:55 AM Page 462
462 research
to Periodical Literatureand the New York Times Index, both of which
have been digitized and may be available in some libraries.
To locate articles in a database, conduct a keyword search. If your
search turns up too many results, refine your search by connecting two
search terms with AND—“engineering AND employment”—or use
other options offered by the database, such as a limited, a modified, or
an advanced search.
Reference Works. In addition to articles, books, and Web sources, you
may want to consult reference works such as encyclopedias, dictionar-
ies, and atlases for a brief overview of your subject. Ask your reference
librarian to recommend works and bibliographies that are most rele-
vant to your topic. Many are available online and can be accessed
through your library’s homepage.
ENCYCLOPEDIAS. Encyclopedias are comprehensive, multivolume
collections of articles arranged alphabetically. Some cover a wide range
of subjects, while others—such as The Encyclopedia of Careers and
Vocational Guidance, 13th ed., edited by William Hopke (Chicago: Fer-
guson, 2005)—focus on specific areas. The free online encyclopedia
Wikipedia at www.wikipedia.org should be used only as a starting
point for your research because users continuously update entries (with
minimal editorial filtering).
DICTIONARIES. General dictionaries can be compact or comprehen-
sive, unabridged publications. Specialized dictionaries define terms used
in a particular field, such as business, computers, architecture, or con-
sumer affairs, and offer detailed definitions of field-specific terms, usu-
ally written in straightforward language.
HANDBOOKS AND MANUALS. Handbooks and manuals are typically
one-volume compilations of frequently used information in a particular
R field. They offer brief definitions of terms or concepts, standards for
presenting information, procedures for documenting sources, and visu-
alssuch as graphsand tables.
BIBLIOGRAPHIES. Bibliographies list books, periodicals, and other
research materials published in areas such as engineering, medicine, the
humanities, and the social sciences.
GENERAL GUIDES. The annotated Guide to Reference Books, 12th
ed., by Robert Balay (Chicago: American Library Association, 2008),
can help you locate reference books, indexes, and other research materi-
als. Check your library’s homepage or ask a reference librarian if your li-
brary subscribes to a particular index and whether it is available online.

=== Page 496 ===
6860ch0R.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:55 AM Page 463
research 463
ATLASES. Atlases provide representations of the physical and politi-
cal boundaries of countries, climate, population, or natural resources.
Microsoft®Encarta®World Atlas 2001. CD-ROM for Windows®.
Microsoft Corporation, 2001. Allows users to access articles and
media files on a wide range of topics.
Google Earth. http://earth.google.com/. Allows users to view
virtually any location on earth, tilt and rotate site views for three-
dimensional images, and save or share search results.
MapQuest. www.mapquest.com/. Allows users to search for spe-
cific locations and view maps and detailed directions to the site.
STATISTICAL SOURCES. Statistical sources are collections of numerical
data. They are the best sources for such information as the U.S. gross
domestic product, the consumer price index, or the demographic break-
down of the general population.
American Statistics Index. Washington, D.C.: Congressional
Information Service, 1978–. Monthly, quarterly, and annual
supplements.
U.S. Census Bureau. Statistical Abstract of the United States.
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1879–. Annual
(www.census.gov).
InternetResearch Strategies
The Internet provides access to a staggering amount of information.
However, the information on the Web varies widely in its completeness
and accuracy, so you need to evaluate Internet sources critically by fol-
lowing the advice in Writer’s Checklist: Evaluating Print and Online
Sourceson page 466.
As comprehensive as search engines and directories may seem, keep
R
in mind that none is complete or objective and they carry only a prese-
lected range of content. Many, for example, do not index Adobe PDF
files or Usenet newsgroups, and many cannot index databases and other
non-HTML-based content. Search engines rank the sites they believe
will be relevant to you based on a number of different strategies. Some
search engines base relevance on how high on the given page your
search term appears, on the number of appearances of your term, or on
the number of other sites that link to the page. Almost all major search
engines now sell high rankings to advertisers with the highest bids, so
your results may not highlight the pages most relevant to your search.
Your best strategy is to research how your favorite search engines work;
nearly all provide detailed methodologies on their help pages.

=== Page 497 ===
6860ch0R.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:55 AM Page 464
464 research
Search Engines. A search engine locates information based on words
or combinations of words that you specify. The software engine then
lists for you the documents or files that contain one or more of these
words in their titles, descriptions, or text. The following search engines
are used widely:
Google www.google.com
MSN www.live.com
Yahoo! www.yahoo.com
Also available are metasearch engines—tools that do not maintain an
internal database but instead launch your query to multiple databases
of various Web-based resources (other search engines or subject direc-
tories).
Dogpile www.dogpile.com
Metacrawler www.metacrawler.com
Many search engines allow advanced searches with options that pro-
vide more selective results. Although search engines vary in what and
how they search, you can use some basic strategies, described in the fol-
lowing Writer’s Checklist.
WRITER’S CHECKLIST Using Search Engines and Keywords
(cid:3)
Enter keywords and phrases thatare as specific to your topic as pos-
sible.For example,if you are looking for information aboutnuclear
powerand enter only the term nuclear,the search will also yield list-
ings for nuclearfamily,nuclearmedicine,and hundreds of others not
related to your topic.
(cid:3)
Use Boolean operators (AND,OR,NOT) to narrow your search.For ex-
ample,if you are searching for information on breastcancer and are
finding references to nothing butprostate cancer,try “breastAND
R cancer NOT prostate.”
(cid:3)
Check any search tips available atthe engine you use.For example,
some engines allow you to use an advanced search thatnarrows your
search by combining phrases with double quotation marks:“usability
testing”will return only pages thathave the full compound phrase.
(cid:3)
Try several search engines to getmore varied results and remember
thathigh rankings may be based on marketing by advertisers.
(cid:3)
Consider using a metasearch engine,such as Dogpile (www.dogpile
.com) and Metacrawler (www.metacrawler.com),if you are interested
in obtaining as many hits as possible.Be prepared to refine and
narrow your search.

=== Page 498 ===
6860ch0R.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:55 AM Page 465
research 465
Web SubjectDirectories. A subject directory (also known as an index)
organizes information by broad subject categories (natural sciences,
entertainment, health, sports) and related subtopics (medicine, ocean-
ography, physics). One such directory is http://directory.google.com/. A
subject-directory search eventually produces a list of specific sites that
contain information about the topics you request.
In addition to the subject directories offered by many search en-
gines, the following directories will help you to conduct selective, schol-
arly research on the Web:
Infomine http://infomine.ucr.edu
The InternetPublic Library www.ipl.org
The WWW Virtual Library www.vlib.org
The Web includes numerous directories and sites devoted to specific
subject areas. Following are some suggested resources for researching
science and technology.
Pace University Library www.pace.edu/library/links/
InternetResources links.html
CIO’s Resource Centers www.cio.com/research
IEEE Spectrum Online www.spectrum.ieee.org
National Science Foundation www.nsf.gov
LSU Libraries Federal www.lib.lsu.edu/gov/fedgov.html
Agencies Directory
FedStats www.fedstats.gov
Some sites combine search engines with directories; for example, Google
operates both a standard search engine and directory and a special
contributor-generated directory referred to as an “Open Directory”
(http://dmoz.org).
Evaluating Sources
The easiest way to ensure that information is valid is to obtain it from a
reputable source. For Internet sources, be especially concerned about R
the validity of the information provided. Because anyone can publish
on the Web, it is sometimes difficult to determine authorship of a docu-
ment, and frequently a person’s qualifications for speaking on a topic
are absent or questionable. The Internet versions of established, rep-
utable journals in medicine, management, engineering, computer soft-
ware, and the like merit the same level of trust as the printed versions.
Use the following domain abbreviations to help you determine an Inter-
net site sponsor:
.aero aerospace industry .mil U.S.military
.biz business .museum museum
.com company or individual .name individual

=== Page 499 ===
6860ch0R.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:55 AM Page 466
466 research
.coop business cooperative .net network provider
.edu college or university .org nonprofitorganization
.gov federal government .int international
.pro professionals .info general use
As you move away from established, reputable sites, exercise more cau-
tion. Be especially wary of unmoderated, public Web forums. Collec-
tively generated Web sites, such as Craigslistand Wikipedia, often make
no guarantee of the validity of information on their sites (see http://en
.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:General_disclaimer).
WRITER’S CHECKLIST Evaluating Printand Online Sources
Keep in mind the following four criteria when evaluating Internetsources:
authority,accuracy,bias,and currency.*
FOR ALL SOURCES
(cid:3)
Is the resource recentenough and relevantto your topic? Is itreadily
available?
(cid:3)
Who is the intended audience? The mainstream public? A small
group of professionals?
(cid:3)
Who is the author(s)? Is the author(s) an authority on the subject?
(cid:3)
Does the author(s) provide enough supporting evidence and docu-
mentsources so thatyou can verify the information’s accuracy?
(cid:3)
Is the information presented in an objective,unbiased way? Are any
biases made clear? Are opinions clearly labeled? Are viewpoints bal-
anced,or are opposing opinions acknowledged?
(cid:3)
Are the language,tone,and style appropriate and cogent?
FOR A BOOK
(cid:3)
Does the preface or introduction indicate the author’s or book’s pur-
pose?
R (cid:3) Does the table of contents relate to your topic? Does the index con-
tain terms related to your topic?
(cid:3)
Are the chapters useful? Skim through one chapter thatseems re-
lated to your topic—notice especially the introduction,headings,and
closing.
FOR AN ARTICLE
(cid:3)
Is the publisher of the magazine or other periodical well known?
(cid:3)
Whatis the article’s purpose? For a journal article,read the abstract;
for a newspaper article,read the headline and lead sentences.
*For more details, see Leigh Ryan, The Bedford Guide for Writing Tutors, 3rd ed.
(Boston: Bedford/St. Martin’s, 2002).

=== Page 500 ===
6860ch0R.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:55 AM Page 467
resignation letters 467
Writer’s Checklist:Evaluating Printand Online Sources (continued)
(cid:3)
Does the article contain informative diagrams or other visuals that
indicate its scope?
FOR A WEB SITE
(cid:3)
Does a reputable group or organization sponsor or maintain the site?
(cid:3)
Are the purpose and scope of the site clearly stated? Check the
“Mission Statement”or “AboutUs”pages.Are there any disclaimers?
(cid:3)
Is the site updated,thus current? Are the links functional and up to
date?
(cid:3)
Is the documentation authoritative and credible? Check the links to
other sources and cross-check facts atother reputable Web sites,such
as academic ones.
(cid:3)
Is the site well designed? Is the material well written and error free?
WEB LINK Evaluating Online Sources
For a tutorial on evaluating information online,see bedfordstmartins
.com/alredtechand selectTutorials,“Evaluating Online Sources.”For
links to additional related resources,selectLinks for Handbook Entries.
resignation letters
Resignation letters (or memos), as shown in Figures R–3 and R–4,
should be as positive as possible, regardless of the reason you are leav-
ing a job. You usually write a resignation letter to your supervisor or to
an appropriate person in the Human Resources Department. Use the
following guidelines. R
• Start on a positive note, regardless of the circumstances under
which you are leaving.
• Consider pointing out how you have benefited from working for
the company or say something complimentary about the company.
• Comment on something positive about the people with whom you
have been associated.
• Explain why you are leaving in an objective, factual tone.
• Avoid angry recriminations because your resignation will remain
on file with the company and could haunt you in the future should
you need references.

=== Page 501 ===
6860ch0R.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:55 AM Page 468
468 resignation letters
227 Kenwood Drive
Austin, TX 78719
January 6, 2009
R.W. Johnson, Director of Metallurgy
Hannibal Laboratories
1914 East 6th Street
Austin, TX 78702
Dear Mr. Johnson:
My three years at Hannibal Laboratories have been an invaluable
period of learning and professional development. I arrived as a
Positive novice, and I believe that today I am a professional—primarily as
opening a result of the personal attention and tutoring I have received from
my superiors and the fine example set by both my superiors and
my peers.
I believe, however, that the time has come for me to move on to
Reason a larger company that can give me an opportunity to continue my
for professional development. Therefore, I have accepted a position
leaving with Procter & Gamble, where I am scheduled to begin on January
26. Thus, my last day at Hannibal will be January 23. I will be
happy to train my replacement during the next two weeks.
Positive Many thanks for the experience I have gained and best wishes for
closing the future.
Sincerely,
J. L. Washburne
J. L. Washburne
R
FIGURER–3. Resignation Letter (to Accepta Better Position)
Your letter or memo should give enough notice to allow your employer
time to find a replacement. It might be no more than two weeks or it
might be enough time to enable you to train your replacement. Some
organizations may ask for a notice equivalent to the number of weeks
of vacation you receive. Check the policy of your employer before you
begin your letter.
The sample resignation letter in Figure R–3 is from an employee
who is leaving to take a job offering greater opportunities. The memo

=== Page 502 ===
6860ch0R.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:55 AM Page 469
respective / respectively 469
MEMORANDUM
To: T. W. Haney, Vice President, Administration
From: L. R. Rupp LRR
Date: February 13, 2009
Subject: Resignation from Winterhaven, effective
March 3, 2009
Positive My five-year stay with the Winterhaven Company has
opening been a pleasant experience, and I believe that it has been
mutually beneficial.
Reason for Because of the recent restructuring of my job, I have
leaving accepted a position with another company that I feel will
offer me greater advancement opportunities. I am, there-
fore, submitting my resignation, to be effective on March 3,
2009.
Positive I have enjoyed working with my coworkers at Winterhaven
closing and wish the company success in the future.
FIGURER–4. Resignation Memo (Under Negative Conditions)
of resignation in Figure R–4 is written by an employee who is leaving
because her position has been reclassified and her supervisor has not
supported her advancement, although no personal conflict is men-
tioned. Notice that it opens and closes positively and that the reason for
the resignation is stated without apparent anger or bitterness. For
strategies concerning negative messages, see correspondenceand refusal
letters.
R
respective / respectively
Respectiveis an adjectivethat means “pertaining to two or more things
regarded individually.” (“The committee members returned to their re-
spectiveoffices.”) Respectivelyis the adverb form of respective, meaning
“singly, in the order designated.”
(cid:2) The first, second, and third engineering design award winners were
Maria Juarez, Dan Wesp, and Simone Luce, respectively.

=== Page 503 ===
6860ch0R.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:55 AM Page 470
470 restrictive and nonrestrictive elements
Respective and respectively are unnecessary if the meaning of individu-
ality is clear.
Each member a report.
(cid:2) Thecommittee membersprepared their respective reports.
^ ^ ^
restrictive and nonrestrictive elements
Modifying phrases and clauses may be either restrictive or nonrestric-
tive. A nonrestrictive phrase or clause provides additional information
about what it modifies, but it does not restrict the meaning of what it
modifies. A nonrestrictive phrase or clause can be removed without
changing the essential meaning of the sentence. It is a parenthetical ele-
ment that is set off by commas to show its loose relationship with the
rest of the sentence.
NONRESTRICTIVE This instrument, which is called a backscatter
gauge, fires beta particles at an object and counts
the particles that bounce back.
A restrictive phrase or clauselimits, or restricts, the meaning of what it
modifies. If it were removed, the essential meaning of the sentence
would change. Because a restrictive phrase or clause is essential to the
meaning of the sentence, it is never set off by commas.
RESTRICTIVE All employees wishing to donate bloodmay take
Thursday afternoon off.
Writers need to distinguish between nonrestrictive and restrictive
elements. The same sentence can take on two entirely different mean-
ings, depending on whether a modifying element is set off by commas
(because it is nonrestrictive) or is not (because it is restrictive). A slip by
R the writer can not only mislead readersbut also embarrass the writer.
MISLEADING He gave a poor performance evaluation to the
staff members who protested to the Human
Resources Department.
[This suggests that he gave the poor evaluation
because the staff members had protested.]
ACCURATE He gave a poor performance evaluation to the
staff members, who protested to the Human
Resources Department.
[This suggests that the staff members protested
because of the poor evaluation.]

=== Page 504 ===
6860ch0R.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:55 AM Page 471
résumés 471
Use which to introduce nonrestrictive clauses and that to introduce re-
strictive clauses.
NONRESTRICTIVE After John left the restaurant, whichis one of the
finest in New York, he came directly to my office.
RESTRICTIVE Companies thatdiversify usually succeed.
résumés
DIRECTORY
Sample Résumés 472
Analyzing Your Background 481
Organizing Your Résumé (Sections) 481
Heading 482
Job Objective 482
Qualifications Summary 483
Education 483
EmploymentExperience 483
Related Skills and Abilities 484
Honors and Activities 485
References and Portfolios 485
Salary and Advice for Returning Job Seekers 485
Salary 485
Returning Job Seekers 485
Electronic Résumés 486
Web Résumés 486
Scannable and Plain-TextRésumés 487
E-mail–Attached Résumés 487
A résumé is the key tool of the job search that itemizes your qualifi-
cations and serves as a foundation for your application letter (often re-
ferred to as a cover letter). A résumé* should be limited to one page— R
or two pages if you have substantial experience. On the basis of the
information in the résumé and application letter, prospective employers
decide whether to ask you to come in for an interview. If you are invited
to an interview, the interviewer can base specific questions on the con-
tents of your résumé. See also interviewing for a job.
Because résumés affect a potential employer’s first impression,
make sure that yours is well organized, carefully designed, consistently
*A detailed résumé for someone in an academic and a scientific area is often called a
curriculum vitae(also vitaor c.v.). It may include education, publications, projects,
grants, and awards as well as a full work history. Outside the United States, the term
curriculum vitaeis often used to mean résumé.

=== Page 505 ===
6860ch0R.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:55 AM Page 472
472 résumés
formatted, easy to read, and free of errors. Consider first an organiza-
tion that highlights your strengths and fits your goals, as suggested by
the examples shown in this entry. Experiment to determine a layoutand
design that is attractive and uncluttered. Consistency is especially im-
portant on a résumé. Be sure to use, for example, the same date formats
(5/2009 or May 2009), punctuation, and spacing throughout. Proof-
reading is essential. Verify the accuracy of the information and have
someone else review it. For hard-copy résumés, use a quality printer
and high-grade paper.
ETHICS NOTE Be truthful. The consequences of giving false informa-
tion in your résumé are serious. In fact, the truthfulness of your résumé
reflects not only on your own ethical stance but also on the integrity
with which you would represent the organization. See also ethics in
writing. ✦
Sample Résumés
The sample résumés in this entry are provided to stimulate your think-
ing about how to tailor your résumé to your own job search. Before
you design and write your résumé, look at as many samples as possible
and then organize and format your own to best suit your previous expe-
rience and your professional goals and to make the most persuasive
case to your target employers. See also persuasion.
• Figure R–5 presents a conventional student résumé in which the
student is seeking an entry-level position.
• Figure R–6 shows a résumé with a variation of the conventional
headings to highlight professional credentials.
• Figure R–7 presents a student résumé with a format that is appro-
priately nonconventional because this student needs to
demonstrate skills in graphic design for his potential audience.
This résumé matches the letter in Figure A–9.
R
• Figure R–8 shows a résumé that focuses on the applicant’s manage-
ment experience. This résumé matches the letter in Figure A–10.
• Figure R–9 focuses on how the applicant advanced and was pro-
moted within a single company.
• Figure R–10 illustrates how an applicant can organize a résumé by
combining functional and chronological elements.
• Figure R–11 presents an electronic résumé in ASCII (American
Standard Code for Information Interchange) format. Notice how
this résumé emphasizes keywords so that potential employers
searching a database for applicants will be able to find it easily.

=== Page 506 ===
6860ch0R.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:55 AM Page 473
résumés 473
ANAMARÍALÓPEZ
CAMPUSADDRESS HOME(after June 2009)
148 University Drive 1436 West Schantz Avenue
Bloomington, Indiana 47405 Laurel, Pennsylvania 17322
(812) 652-4781 (717) 399-2712
aml@iu.edu aml@yahoo.com
OBJECTIVE
Position as dental hygienist, with long-term goal of developing a
community practice dental service.
EDUCATION
Bachelor of Science in Dental Hygiene, expected June 2009
Indiana University
Licensure: August 2008
Grade Point Average: 3.88 out of possible 4.0
Senior Honor Society
Minor: Management Information Systems
DENTALEXPERIENCE
NORTHPOINTDENTALASSOCIATES,Bloomington, Indiana, 2008
Dental Assistant, Summer and Fall Quarters
Developed office and laboratory management system.
RODRIGUEZDENTALASSOCIATES, Bloomington, Indiana, 2007
Dental Assistant Intern
Prepared patients for exams; processed X-rays; maintained patient
treatment records.
Associate Editor, Community Health Newsletter, 2006–2007
Wrote articles on good dental health practices; researched community
health needs for editor; edited submissions.
COMPUTER SKILLS R
Software: Microsoft Word, Excel, PowerPoint, Lotus
Hardware: Macintosh, IBM-PC
Medical: Magnus Patient Database System, Dentrix
REFERENCES
Available on request.
FIGURER–5. StudentRésumé (for an Entry-Level Position)

=== Page 507 ===
6860ch0R.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:55 AM Page 474
CHRIS RENAULT, RN
3785 Raleigh Court, #46 • Phoenix, AZ 67903 •
(555) 467-1115 • chris@resumepower.com
Qualifications
➢ Recent Honors Graduate of Approved Nursing Program
➢ Current Arizona Nursing Licensure and BLS Certification
➢ Presently Completing Clinical Nurse Internship Program
Education & Licensure
ARIZONA STATE UNIVERSITY MOHAVE COMMUNITY COLLEGE
Tempe, AZ Kingman, AZ
Bachelor of Science in Nursing Associate Degree in Nursing (AN),
(BSN), 2009 2007
Graduated summa cum laude Graduated cum laude (GPA: 3.5)
(GPA: 4.0)
Coursework Highlights:Family and Community Nursing, Health-Care
Delivery Models, Health Assessment, Pathology, Microbiology, Nursing Re-
search, Nursing of Older Adults, Health-Care Ethics
Arizona RN License, 2009
BLS Certification, 2009
Clinical Internship
CAMELBACK MEDICAL CENTER—Phoenix, AZ
Nurse Intern, 2008 to Present
• Accepted into new graduate RN training program and completing in-
depth, eight-month rotation working under a trained preceptor.
• Gaining valuable clinical experience to assume the role of a professional
nurse within an acute-care setting. Rotating through all medical center areas,
including Postsurgical, Orthopedics, Pediatrics, Oncology,Emergency
Department, Psychiatric Nursing, Cardiac Telemetry, and CriticalCare.
• Developing speed and skill in the day-to-day functions of a staff nurse.
Participating in patient assessment, treatment, medication disbursement,
and surgical preparation as a member of the health-care team.
R • Earned written commendations from preceptor for “excellent ability to in-
teract with patients and their families, showing a high degree of empathy,
medical knowledge, and concern for quality and continuity of patient care.”
Community Involvement
Active Volunteer and Fundraising Coordinator, The American Cancer
Society—Scottsdale, AZ, Chapter (2007 to Present)
Participant, Annual AIDS Walkathon (2004 to 2007) and “Find the Cure”
Breast Cancer Awareness Marathon (2006, 2007)
FIGURER–6. Résumé (Highlighting Professional Credentials).Prepared by Kim
Isaacs,Advanced Career Systems,Inc.
474

=== Page 508 ===
6860ch0R.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:55 AM Page 475
résumés 475
JG
Joshua S.Goodman
222 Morewood Avenue
Pittsburgh,PA 15212
cell:412-555-1212
jgoodman@aol.com
OBJECTIVE
A position as a graphic designer
with responsibilities in information
EDUCATION
design, packaging, and media
presentations. Carnegie Mellon University,
Pittsburgh,Pennsylvania
BFA in Graphic Design—
May 2009
GRAPHIC DESIGN EXPERIENCE
Graphic Design
Assistant Designer • Dyer/Khan, Corporate Identity
Los Angeles,California Industrial Design
Graphic Imaging Processes
Summer 2007,Summer 2008
Color Theory
Assistant Designer in a versatile de-
Computer Graphics
sign studio. Responsible for design,
Typography
layout, comps, mechanicals, and Serigraphy
project management. Photography
Clients: Paramount Pictures, Mattel Video Production
Electronics, and Motown Records.
COMPUTER SKILLS
Photo Editor • Paramount Pictures
Corporation,Los Angeles,California XML, HTML, JavaScript,
Summer 2006 Forms, Macromedia
Photo Editor for merchandising de- Dreamweaver, Macromedia
partment. Established art files for Flash Professional, Photo-
movie and television properties. shop, Illustrator, Image Ready
Edited images used in merchan- (Animated GIFs), CorelDRAW,
dising. Maintained archive and DeepPaint, iGrafx Designer,
database. MapEdit (Image Mapping),
Scanning, Microsoft Access/
R
Production Assistant • Grafis, Excel, QuarkXPress.
Los Angeles,California
Summer 2005
Production assistant at fast-paced de- ACTIVITIES
sign firm. Assisted with comps, me-
Member, Pittsburgh
chanicals, and miscellaneous studio
Graphic Design Society;
work.
Member, The Design
Clients: ABC Television, A&M
Group.
Records, and Ortho Products
Division.
FIGURER–7. StudentRésumé (for a Graphic Design Job)

=== Page 509 ===
6860ch0R.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:55 AM Page 476
476 résumés
ROBERT MANDILLO
7761 Shalamar Drive
Dayton, Ohio 45424
(937) 255-4137
mand@juno.com
OBJECTIVE
A management position in the aerospace industry with responsibility
for developing new designs and products.
MANAGEMENTEXPERIENCE
MANAGER, EXHIBITDESIGNLAB—May 2002–Present
Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Dayton, Ohio
Supervise 11 technicians in support of engineering exhibit design and
production. Develop, evaluate, and improve materials and equipment
for the design and construction of exhibits. Write specifications, negoti-
ate with vendors, and initiate procurement activities for exhibit design
support.
SUPERVISOR, GRAPHICSILLUSTRATORS—June 1999–April 2002
Henderson Advertising Agency, Cincinnati, Ohio
Supervised five illustrators and four drafting mechanics after promotion
from Graphics Technician. Analyzed and approved work-order require-
ments. Selected appropriate media and techniques for orders. Rendered
illustrations in pencil and ink. Converted department to CAD system.
EDUCATION
MASTEROFBUSINESSADMINISTRATION,2008
University of Dayton, Ohio
BACHELOROFSCIENCEINMECHANICALENGINEERINGTECHNOLOGY,1989
Edison State College, Wooster, Ohio
R ASSOCIATE’SDEGREEINMECHANICALDRAFTING,1987
Wooster Community College, Wooster, Ohio
PROFESSIONAL AFFILIATION
National Association of Mechanical Engineers
REFERENCES /WEB SITE
References, letters of recommendation, and a portfolio of original
designs and drawings available online at <www.juno.com/mand>.
FIGURER–8. Résumé (Applicantwith ManagementExperience)

=== Page 510 ===
6860ch0R.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:55 AM Page 477
résumés 477
CAROL ANN WALKER
1436 West Schantz Avenue
Laurel, Pennsylvania 17322
(717) 399-2712
caw@yahoo.com
FINANCIALEXPERIENCE
KERFHEIMERCORPORATION, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Senior Financial Analyst, June 2004–Present
Report to Senior Vice President for Corporate Financial Planning.
Develop manufacturing cost estimates totaling $30 million annually
for mining and construction equipment with Department of Defense.
Financial Analyst, November 2001–June 2004
Developed $50-million funding estimates for major Department of
Defense contracts for troop carriers and digging and earth-moving
machines. Researched funding options, resulting in savings of
$1.2 million.
FIRSTBANK, INC., Bloomington, Indiana
Planning Analyst, September 1996–November 2001
Developed successful computer models for short- and long-range planning.
EDUCATION
Ph.D. in Finance: expected, June 2009
The Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania
M.S. in Business Administration, 2000
University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee
“Executive Curriculum” for employees identified as promising by their
employers.
B.S. in Business Administration (magna cum laude), 1996
Indiana University
Emphasis: Finance Minor: Professional Writing R
PUBLISHING AND MEMBERSHIP
Published “Developing Computer Models for Financial Planning,” Midwest
Finance Journal34.2 (2006): 126–36.
Association for Corporate Financial Planning, Senior Member.
REFERENCES
References and a portfolio of financial plans are available on request.
FIGURER–9. Advanced Résumé (Showing Promotion Within a Single Company)

=== Page 511 ===
6860ch0R.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:55 AM Page 478
478 résumés
CAROL ANN WALKER
1436 West Schantz Avenue • Laurel, PA 17322
(717) 399-2712 • caw@yahoo.com
Award-Winning Senior Financial Analyst
Astute senior analyst and corporate financial planner with 11 years of
experience and proven success enhancing P&L scenarios by millions of
dollars. Demonstrated ability to apply critical thinking and sound strategic/
economic analysis to multidimensional business issues. Advanced com-
puter skills include Hyperion, SQL, MS Office, and Crystal Reports.
Financial Analyst of the Year, 2007
Recipient of prestigious national award from the Association for
Investment Management and Research (AIMR)
Areas of Expertise
• Financial Analysis & Planning • Expense Analysis
• Forecasting & Trend Projection • Strategic Planning
• Trend/Variance Analysis • SEC & Financial Reporting
• Comparative Analysis • Risk Assessment
Career Progression
KERFHEIMER CORPORATION—Philadelphia, PA 2001 to Present
Senior Financial Analyst, June 2004 to Present
Financial Analyst, November 2001 to June 2004
Rapidly promoted to lead team of 15 analysts in the management of finan-
cial/SEC reporting and analysis for publicly traded, $2.3-billion company.
Develop financial/statistical models used to project and maximize corpo-
rate financial performance. Support nationwide sales team by providing fi-
nancial metrics, trends, and forecasts.
R
Key Accomplishments:
• Developed long-range funding requirements crucial to firm’s subse-
quent capture of $1 billionin government and military contracts.
• Facilitated a 45% decrease in company’s long-term debtduring sev-
eral major building expansions through personally developed computer
models for capital acquisition.
• Jointly led large-scale systems conversion to Hyperion, including per-
sonal upload of database in Essbase. Completed conversion without in-
terrupting business operations.
FIGURER–10. Advanced Résumé (Combining Functional and Chronological
Elements).Prepared by Kim Isaacs,Advanced Career Systems,Inc.

=== Page 512 ===
6860ch0R.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:55 AM Page 479
résumés 479
CAROL ANN WALKER
Résumé • Page Two
Career Progression (continued)
FIRST BANK, INC.—Bloomington, IN 1996 to 2001
Planning Analyst, September 1996 to November 2001
Compiled and distributed weekly, monthly, quarterly, and annual closings/
financial reports, analyzing information for presentation to senior manage-
ment. Prepared depreciation forecasts, actual-vs.-projected financial state-
ments, key-matrix reports, tax-reporting packages, auditor packages, and
balance-sheet reviews.
Key Accomplishments:
• Devised strategies to acquire over $1 billion at 3% below market
rate.
• Analyzed financial performance for consistency to plans and fore-
casts,investigated trends and variances, and alerted senior management
to areas requiring action.
• Achieved an average 23% return on all personally recommended
investments.Applied critical thinking and sound financial and strategic
analysis in all funding options research.
Education
THEWHARTONSCHOOLof the UNIVERSITYOFPENNSYLVANIA
(Philadelphia)
Ph.D. in Finance Candidate, Expected June 2009
UNIVERSITYOFWISCONSIN–MILWAUKEE
M.S. in Business Administration, May 2000
INDIANAUNIVERSITY(Bloomington)
B.S. in Business Administration, Emphasis in Finance
(magna cum laude), May 1996
R
Affiliations
• Association for Investment Management and Research (AIMR), Mem-
ber, 2003 to Present
• Association for Corporate Financial Planning (ACFP), Senior Member,
2001 to Present
Portfolio of Financial Plans Available on Request
(717) 399-2712 • caw@yahoo.com
FIGURER–10. Advanced Résumé (Combining Functional and Chronological
Elements) (continued)

=== Page 513 ===
6860ch0R.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:55 AM Page 480
480 résumés
DAVID B. EDWARDS
6819 Locustview Drive
Topeka, Kansas 66614
(913) 233-1552
dedwards@cpu.fairview.edu
JOB OBJECTIVE
Programmer with writing, editing, and training responsibilities,
leading to a career in information design management.
KEYWORDS
Programmer, Operating Systems, Unipro, Newsletter, Graphics,
Listserv, Professional Writer, Editor, Trainer, Instructor,
Technical Writer, Tutor, Designer, Manager, Information Design.
EDUCATION
** Fairview Community College, Topeka, Kansas
** Associate’s Degree, Computer Science, June 2006
** Dean’s Honor List Award (six quarters)
RELEVANT COURSE WORK
** Operating Systems Design
** Database Management
** Introduction to Cybernetics
** Technical Writing
EMPLOYMENT EXPERIENCE
** Computer Consultant: September 2006 to Present
Fairview Community College Computer Center: Advised and trained novice
users; wrote and maintained Unipro operating system documentation.
** Tutor: January 2005 to June 2006
Fairview Community College: Assisted students in mathematics and
computer programming.
SKILLS AND ACTIVITIES
** Unipro Operating System: Thorough knowledge of word-processing,
text-editing, and file-formatting programs.
** Writing and Editing Skills: Experience in documenting computer
programs for beginning programmers and users.
** Fairview Community Microcomputer Users Group: Cofounder and
editor of monthly newsletter (“Compuclub”); listserv manager.
R
FURTHER INFORMATION
** References, college transcripts, a portfolio of computer programs,
and writing samples available on request.
FIGURER–11. Electronic Résumé (in ASCII Format)

=== Page 514 ===
6860ch0R.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:55 AM Page 481
résumés 481
WEB LINK Annotated Sample Résumés
For more examples of résumés with helpful annotations,see
bedfordstmartins.com/alredtechand selectModel Documents Gallery.
Analyzing Your Background
In preparing to write your résumé, determine what kind of job you are
seeking. Then ask yourself what information about you and your back-
ground would be most important to a prospective employer. List the
following:
• Schools you attended, degrees you hold, your major field of study,
academic honors you were awarded, your grade point average,
particular academic projects that reflect your best work
• Jobs you have held, your principal and secondary duties in each
job, when and how long you held each job, promotions, skills you
developed in your jobs that potential employers value and seek in
ideal job candidates, projects or accomplishments that reflect your
important contributions
• Other experiences and skills you have developed that would be of
value in the kind of job you are seeking; extracurricular activities
that have contributed to your learning experience; leadership, in-
terpersonal, and communication skills you have developed; any
collaborative work you have performed; computer skills you have
acquired
Use this information to brainstorm any further key details. Then, based
on all the details, decide which to include in your résumé and how you
can most effectively present your qualifications.
Organizing Your Résumé (Sections)
R
A number of different organizational patterns can be used effectively.
The following sections are typical—which you choose should depend
on your experience and goals, the employer’s needs, and any standard
practices in your profession.
• Heading (name and contact information)
• Job Objective
• Qualifications Summary
• Education
• Employment Experience

=== Page 515 ===
6860ch0R.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:55 AM Page 482
482 résumés
• Related Skills and Abilities
• Honors and Activities
• References and Portfolios
Whether you place “education” before “employment experience” de-
pends on the job you are seeking and on which credentials would
strengthen your résumé the most. If you are a recent graduate without
much work experience, list education first. If you have years of job
experience, including jobs directly related to the kind of position you
are seeking, list employment experience first. In your education and
employment sections, use a reverse chronological sequence: List the
most recent experience first, the next most recent experience second,
and so on.
Heading. At the top of your résumé, include your name, address, tele-
phone number (home or cell), and a professional e-mail address.*
Make sure that your name stands out on the page. If you have both a
school address and a permanent home address, place your school ad-
dress on the left side of the page and your permanent home address on
the right side of the page. Place both underneath your name, as shown
in Figure R–5. Indicate the dates you can be reached at each address
(but do not date the résumé itself).
Job Objective. Some potential employers prefer to see a clear employ-
ment objective in résumés. An objective introduces the material in a ré-
sumé and helps the reader quickly understand your goal. If you decide
to include an objective, use a heading such as “Objective,” “Employ-
ment Objective,” “Career Objective,” or “Job Objective.” State your
immediate goal and, if you know that it will give you an advantage, the
direction you hope your career will take. Try to write your objective in
no more than three lines, and tailor it to the specific job for which you
are applying, as illustrated in the following examples:
R
• A full-time computer-science position aimed at solving engineering
problems and contributing to a management team.
• A position involving meeting the concerns of women, such as
family planning, career counseling, or crisis management.
• Full-time management of a high-quality local restaurant.
• A summer research or programming position providing opportuni-
ties to use software-development and software-debugging skills.
*Do not use a clever or hobby-related e-mail address in employment correspondence;
e-mail addresses that are based on your last name work well.

=== Page 516 ===
6860ch0R.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:55 AM Page 483
résumés 483
Qualifications Summary. You may wish to include a brief summary of
your qualifications to persuade hiring managers to select you for an in-
terview. Sometimes called a summary statement or career summary, a
qualifications summary can include skills, achievements, experience, or
personal qualities that make you especially well suited to the position.
You may wish to give this section a heading such as “Profile,” “Career
Highlights,” or simply “Qualifications.” Or you may use a headline, as
shown on the first page of the résumé in Figure R–10 (“Award-Winning
Senior Financial Analyst”).
Education. List the school(s) you have attended, the degree(s) you re-
ceived and the dates you received them, your major field(s) of study,
and any academic honors you have earned. Include your grade point
average only if it is 3.0 or higher—or include your average in your
major if that is more impressive. List courses only if they are unusually
impressive or if your résumé is otherwise sparse (see Figures R–6 and
R–7). Consider including the skills developed or projects completed in
your course work. Mention your high school only if you want to call
attention to special high school achievements, awards, projects, pro-
grams, internships, or study abroad.
Employment Experience. Organize your employment experience in
reverse chronological order, starting with your most recent job and
working backward under a single major heading called “Experience,”
“Employment,” “Professional Experience,” or the like. You could also
organize your experience functionally by clustering similar types of jobs
into one or several sections with specific headings such as “Manage-
ment Experience” or “Major Accomplishments.”
One type of arrangement might be more persuasive than the other,
depending on the situation. For example, if you are applying for an ac-
counting job but have no specific background in accounting, you would
probably do best to list past and present jobs in chronological order,
from most to least recent. If you are applying for a supervisory position
R
and have had three supervisory jobs in addition to two nonsupervisory
positions, you might choose to create a single section called “Supervi-
sory Experience” and list only your three supervisory jobs. Or you
could create two sections—“Supervisory Experience” and “Other Ex-
perience”—and include the three supervisory jobs in the first section
and the nonsupervisory jobs in the second section.
The functional résumé groups work experience by types of work-
place activities or skills rather than by jobs in chronological order.
However, many employers are suspicious of functional résumés because
they can be used to hide a poor work history, such as excessive job
hopping or extended employment gaps. Functional elements can be

=== Page 517 ===
6860ch0R.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:55 AM Page 484
484 résumés
combined with a chronological arrangement by using a qualifications
summary or skills section, as shown in Figure R–10.
In general, follow these conventions when working on the “Experi-
ence” section of your résumé.
• Include jobs or internships when they relate directly to the position
you are seeking. Although some applicants choose to omit intern-
ships and temporary or part-time jobs, including such experiences
can make a résumé more persuasive if they have helped you de-
velop specific related skills.
• Include extracurricular experiences, such as taking on a leadership
position in a college organization or directing a community-service
project, if they demonstrate that you have developed skills valued
by potential employers.
• List military service as a job; give the dates served, the duty spe-
cialty, and the rank at discharge. Discuss military duties if they
relate to the job you are seeking.
• For each job or experience, list both the job and company titles.
Throughout each section, consistently begin with either the job or
the company title, depending on which will likely be more impres-
sive to potential employers.
• Under each job or experience, provide a concise description of
your primary and secondary duties. If a job is not directly relevant,
provide only a job title and a brief description of duties that helped
you develop skills valued in the position you are seeking. For ex-
ample, if you were a lifeguard and now seek a management
position, focus on supervisory experience or even experience in
averting disaster to highlight your management, decision-making,
and crisis-control skills.
• Focus as much as possible on your achievements in your work his-
tory (“Increased employee retention rate by 16 percent by
R developing a training program”). Employers want to hire doers
and achievers.
• Use action verbs (for example, “managed” rather than “as the
manager”) and state ideas succinctly, as shown in Figure R–8. Even
though the résumé is about you, do not use “I” (for example, in-
stead of “I was promoted to Section Leader,” use “Promoted to
Section Leader”). For electronic résumés that will be scanned for
keywords, however, replace such verbs with nouns (instead of
“managed” use manager,as in Figure R–11).
Related Skills and Abilities. Employers are interested in hiring appli-
cants with a variety of skills or the ability to learn new ones quickly.
Depending on the position, you might list in a skills section items such

=== Page 518 ===
6860ch0R.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:55 AM Page 485
résumés 485
as fluency in foreign languages, writing and editing abilities, specialized
technical knowledge, or computer skills (including knowledge of spe-
cific languages, software, and hardware).
Honors and Activities. If you have room on your résumé, list any hon-
ors and unique activities near the end. Include items such as student or
community activities, professional or club memberships, awards re-
ceived, and published works. Be selective: Do not duplicate information
given in other categories, and include only information that supports
your employment objective. Provide a heading for this section that fits
its contents, such as “Activities,” “Honors,” “Professional Affilia-
tions,” or “Publications and Memberships.”
References and Portfolios. Avoid listing references unless that is stan-
dard practice in your profession or your résumé is sparse. If you create
a separate list of references for prospective employers, you can include
a phrase such as “References available on request” to signal the end
of a résumé, or write “Available on request” after the heading “Refer-
ences” as a design element to balance a page. Always seek permission
from anyone you list as a reference.
A portfolio is a collection of samples in a binder or on the Web of
your most impressive work and accomplishments. The portfolio can in-
clude successful documents you have written, articles, letters of praise
from employers, and copies of awards and certificates. If you have devel-
oped a portfolio, you could also include the phrase “Portfolio available
on request.” If portfolios are standard in your profession, you might
even include a small section that lists the contents of your portfolio.
Salary and Advice for Returning Job Seekers
Salary. Avoid listing the salary you desire in the résumé. On the one
hand, you may price yourself out of a job you want if the salary you list
is higher than a potential employer is willing to pay. On the other hand, R
if you list a low salary, you may not get the best possible offer. See
salary negotiations.
Returning Job Seekers. If you are returning to the workplace after an
absence, most career experts say that it is important to acknowledge the
gap in your career. That is particularly true if, for example, you are
reentering the workforce because you have devoted a full-time period to
care for children or dependent adults. Do not undervalue such work.
Although unpaid, it often provides experience that develops important
time-management, problem-solving, organizational, and interpersonal
skills. Although gaps in employment can be explained in the application
letter, the following examples illustrate how you might reflect such

=== Page 519 ===
6860ch0R.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:55 AM Page 486
486 résumés
experiences in a résumé. They would be especially appropriate for an
applicant seeking employment in a field related to child or health care.
(cid:2) Primary Child-Care Provider, 2006 to 2008
Provided full-time care to three preschool children at home.
Instructed in beginning academic skills, time management, basics
of nutrition, arts, and swimming. Organized activities, managed
household, and served as neighborhood-watch captain.
(cid:2) Home Caregiver, 2006 to 2008
Provided 60 hours per week in-home care to Alzheimer’s patient.
Coordinated medical care, developed exercise programs, completed
and processed complex medical forms, administered medications,
organized budget, and managed home environment.
If you have performed volunteer work during such a period, list that ex-
perience. Volunteer work often results in the same experience as does
full-time, paid work, a fact that your résumé should reflect, as in the
following example.
(cid:2) School Association Coordinator, 2006 to 2008
Managed special activities of the Briarwood High School Parent-
Teacher Association. Planned and coordinated meetings, scheduled
events, and supervised fund-drive operations. Raised $70,000
toward refurbishing the school auditorium.
Electronic Résumés
In addition to the traditional paper résumé, you can post a Web-based
résumé. You may also need to submit a scannable, plain-text résumé
through e-mail or an online form to a potential employer to be included
in an organization’s database. As Internet and database technologies
converge, remain current with the forms and protocols that employers
prefer by reviewing popular job-search sites, such as HotJobs at
http://hotjobs.yahoo.comand Monster.com at www.monster.com.
R
Web Résumés. If you plan to post your résumé on your own Web site,
keep the following points in mind.
• Follow the general advice for Web design, such as viewing your
résumé on several browsers to see how it looks.
• Just below your name, you may wish to provide a series of internal
page links to such important categories as “experience” and “edu-
cation.”
• Consider building a multipage site for displaying a work portfolio,
publications, reference letters, and other related materials.
• If privacy is an issue, include an e-mail link (“mailto”) at the top of
the résumé rather than your home address and phone number.

=== Page 520 ===
6860ch0R.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:55 AM Page 487
résumés 487
The disadvantage of posting a résumé at your own Web site is that you
must attract the attention of employers on your own. For that reason,
commercial services may be a better option because they can attract re-
cruiters with their large databases.
Scannable and Plain-Text Résumés. A scannable résumé is normally
mailed to an employer in paper form, scanned, and downloaded into a
company’s searchable database. Such a résumé can be well formatted,
but it should not contain decorative fonts, underlining, shading, letters
that touch each other, and other features that will not scan easily. Scan
such a résumé yourself to make sure there are no problems.
Some employers request ASCII or plain-text résumés via e-mail,
which can be added directly into the résumé database without scanning.
The ASCII résumés also allow employers to read the file no matter what
type of software they are using. You can copy and paste such a résumé
directly into the body of the e-mail message.
DIGITAL TIP
Preparing an ASCII Résumé
When preparing an ASCII document,proper formatting is critical.For
example, you need to insert manual line breaks at 65 characters to
preventlong,single lines when the documents are opened in various
systems.Further,many word-processing elements such as bullets,un-
derlining,and boldface are incompatible with ASCII,which is limited
to letters,numbers,and basic punctuation.For more on this topic,see
bedfordstmartins.com/alredtechand selectDigital Tips,“Preparing an
ASCII Résumé.”
For résumés that will be downloaded into databases, it is better to
use nouns than verbs to describe experience and skills (designer and
managementrather than designedand managed). You may also include R
a section in such a résumé titled “Keywords” (or perhaps give a descrip-
tive name, such as “Areas of Expertise”). Keywords, also called descrip-
tors, allow potential employers to search the database for qualified
candidates. So be sure to use keywords that are the same as those used
in the employer’s descriptions of the jobs that best match your interests
and qualifications. This section can follow the main heading or appear
near the end of your résumé. Figure R–11 is an example of an electronic
résumé that demonstrates the use of keywords.
E-mail–Attached Résumés. An employer may request, or you may pre-
fer to submit, a résumé as an e-mail attachment to be printed out by the
employer. If so, consider using a relatively plain design and sending the
résumé as a rich text format (.rtf) document. Or, if precise design is

=== Page 521 ===
6860ch0R.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:55 AM Page 488
488 revision
important, send the résumé as a portable document format (PDF) file
that will preserve the fonts, images, graphics, and layout. You can at-
tach this file to an e-mail message that will then serve as your applica-
tion letter. See Digital Tip: Using PDF Files on page 574.
revision
When you revise your draft, read and evaluate it primarily from the
point of view of your audience. In fact, revising requires a different
frame of mind than writing a draft. To achieve that frame of mind, ex-
perienced writers have developed the following tactics:
• Allow a “cooling period” between writing the draft and revision in
order to evaluate the draft objectively.
• Print out your draft and mark up the paper copy; it is often diffi-
cult to revise on-screen.
• Read your draft aloud—often, hearing the text will enable you to
spot problem areas that need improvement.
• Revise in passes by reading through your draft several times, each
time searching for and correcting a different set of problems.
When you can no longer spot improvements, you may wish to give the
draft to a colleague for review—especially for projects that are crucial
for you or your organization as well as for collaborative projects, as de-
scribed in collaborative writing.
WRITER’S CHECKLIST Revising Your Draft
(cid:3)
Completeness.Does the documentachieve its primary purpose? Will
itfulfill the readers’needs? Your writing should give readers exactly
R whatthey need butnotoverwhelm them.
(cid:3)
Appropriate introduction and conclusion.Check to see thatyour intro-
ductionframes the restof the documentand your conclusionties the
main ideas together.Both should accountfor revisions to the content
of the document.
(cid:3)
Accuracy.Look for any inaccuracies thatmay have creptinto your
draft.
(cid:3)
Unity and coherence.Check to see thatsentences and ideas are closely
tied together (coherence) and contribute directly to the main idea
expressed in the topic sentence of each paragraph(see unity).Provide
transitionswhere they are missing and strengthen those thatare
weak.

=== Page 522 ===
6860ch0R.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:55 AM Page 489
revision 489
Writer’s Checklist:Revising Your Draft(continued)
(cid:3)
Consistency.Make sure thatlayoutand design,visuals,and use of
language are consistent.Do notcall the same item by one term on
one page and a differentterm on another page.
(cid:3)
Conciseness.Tighten your writing so thatitsays exactly whatyou
mean.Prune unnecessary words,phrases,sentences,and even
paragraphs.See conciseness.
(cid:3)
Awkwardness.Look for awkwardnessin sentence construction—
especially any garbled sentences.
(cid:3)
Ethical writing.Check for ethics in writingand eliminate biased
language.
(cid:3)
Active voice.Use the active voiceunless the passive voice is more
appropriate.
(cid:3)
Word choice.Delete or replace vague wordsand unnecessary inten-
sifiers.Check for affectationand unclear pronoun references.See
also word choice.
(cid:3)
Jargon.If you have any doubtthatall your readers will understand
any jargonor special terms you have used,eliminate or define them.
(cid:3)
Clichés.Replace clichéswith fresh figures of speechor direct
statements.
(cid:3)
Grammar.Check your draftfor grammatical errors.Use computer
grammarcheckers with caution.Because they are notalways
accurate,treattheir recommendations only as suggestions.
(cid:3)
Typographical errors.Check your final draftfor typographical errors
both with your spell checker and with thorough proofreading
because spell checkers do notcatch all errors.
(cid:3)
Wordy phrases.Use the search-and-replace command to find and
revise wordy phrases,such as thatis,there are,the factthat,and
to be,and unnecessary helping verbssuch as will.
R
DIGITAL TIP
Incorporating Tracked Changes
When colleagues review your document,they can track changes and
insertcomments within the documentitself.Tracking and comment-
ing vary with types and versions of word-processing programs,butin
mostprograms you can view the tracked changes on a single draftor
review the multiple drafts of your reviewers’versions.For more on this
topic, see bedfordstmartins.com/alredtech and select Digital Tips,
“Tracked Changes.”

=== Page 523 ===
6860ch0R.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:55 AM Page 490
490 rhetorical questions
rhetorical questions
A rhetorical question is a question to which a specific answer is neither
needed nor expected. The question is often intended to make an audi-
ence think about the subject from a different perspective; the writer or
speaker then answers the question in an article or a presentation. The
answer to a rhetorical question such as “Is space exploration worth the
cost?” may not be a simple yes or no; it might be a detailed explanation
of the pros and cons of the value of space exploration.
The rhetorical question can be used as an effective titleor opening,
especially in newsletter articles, brochures, or even blogs. However, it
should be used judiciously in other, more formal documents. A rhetori-
cal question, for example, would not be appropriate for the title of a
report or an e-mail addressed to a manager who needs to quickly un-
derstand the subject and purpose of the document or message.
run-on sentences
A run-on sentence, sometimes called a fused sentence, is two or more
sentences without punctuation to separate them. The term is also some-
times applied to a pair of independent clauses separated by only a
comma, although this variation is usually called a comma splice. See
also sentence constructionand sentence faults.
Run-on sentences can be corrected, as shown in the following ex-
amples, by (1) making two sentences, (2) joining the two clauses with a
semicolon(if they are closely related), (3) joining the two clauses with a
comma and a coordinating conjunction, or (4) subordinating one clause
to the other.
. Some
(cid:2) The client suggested several solutions someare impractical.
R ^
;
(cid:2) The client suggested several solution some are impractical.
^
, but
(cid:2) The client suggested several solutions some are impractical.
^
, although
(cid:2) The client suggested several solutions some are impractical.
^

=== Page 524 ===
HTW_ch0S.qxp 8/22/08 8:55 AM Page 491
S
salary negotiations
Salary negotiations usually take place either at the end of an interview
or after a formal job offer has been made. If possible, delay discussing
salary until after you receive a formal written job offer because you will
have more negotiating leverage at that point. See also job search.
Before interviewing for a job, prepare for possible salary negotia-
tions by researching the following:
• The current range of salaries for the work you hope to do at your
level (entry? intermediate? advanced?) in your region of the coun-
try. Check trade journals and organizations in your field, or ask a
reference librarian for help in finding this information. Job listings
that include salary can also be helpful.
• Salaries made by last year’s graduates from your college or uni-
versity at your level and in your line of work. Your campus
career-development office should have these figures.
• Salaries made by people you know at your level and in your line of
work. Attend local organizational meetings in your field or contact
officers of local organizations who might have this information or
steer you to useful contacts.
If a potential employer requests your salary requirements with your
résumé, consider your options carefully. If you provide a salary that is
too high, the company might never interview you; if you provide a
salary that is too low, you may have no opportunity later in the hiring
process to negotiate for a higher salary. However, if you fail to follow
the potential employer’s directions and omit the requested information, S
an employer may disqualify you on principle. If you choose to provide
salary requirements, always do so in a range (for example, $35,000 to
$40,000). See also application letters.
If an interviewer asks your salary requirements toward the end of
the job interview, you can try the following strategies to delay salary ne-
gotiations:
• Say something like, “I am sure that this company pays a fair salary
for a person with my level of experience and qualifications” or “I
am ready to consider your best offer.”
491

=== Page 525 ===
HTW_ch0S.qxp 8/22/08 8:55 AM Page 492
492 salary negotiations
• Indicate that you would like to learn more details about the posi-
tion before discussing salary; point out that your primary goal is to
work in a stimulating environment with growth potential, not to
earn a specific salary.
• Express generally a strong interest in the position and the organi-
zation without referring to the salary.
• Reemphasize your unique qualifications (or combination of skills)
for the job and what you can do for the company that other candi-
dates cannot.
If the interviewer or company demands to know your salary require-
ments during a job interview, provide a wide salary range that you
know would be reasonable for someone at your level in your line of
work in that region of the country. For example, you could say, “I
would hope for a salary somewhere between $28,000 and $38,000, but
of course this is negotiable.”
WEB LINK Salary Information Resources
For links to Web sites offering useful resources for salary negotiations,
see bedfordstmartins.com/alredtechand selectLinks for Handbook
Entries.
Once salary negotiations begin, resist the temptation to immedi-
ately accept the first salary offer you receive. If you have done thorough
research, you will know if the first salary offer is at the low, middle, or
high end of the salary range for your level of experience in your line of
work. If you have little or no experience and receive an offer for a
salary at the low end of the range, you will realize that the offer proba-
bly is fair and reasonable. However, if you receive the same low-end
offer but bring considerable experience to the job, you can negotiate
for a higher salary that is more reasonable for someone with your
background and credentials in your line of work in your region of the
country.
S
Never say that you are unable to accept a salary below a particular
figure. To keep negotiations going, simply indicate that you would have
trouble accepting the first offer because it was lower than you had ex-
pected.
Remember that you are negotiating a package and not just a start-
ing salary. For example, consider the value of a chance for an early pro-
motion, thus a higher salary, within a few years or a particular job title
or special responsibilities that would provide you with impressive
chances for career growth. If the starting salary seems low, consider ne-
gotiating for some of the following possible job perks:

=== Page 526 ===
HTW_ch0S.qxp 8/22/08 8:55 AM Page 493
scope 493
• Tuition reimbursement for • Retirement plans, such as
continued education 401(k) and pension plans
• Payment of relocation costs • Profit sharing; investment or
stock options
• Paid personal leave or paid
vacations • Bonuses or cost-of-living
adjustments
• Paid personal or sick days
• Commuting or parking-cost re-
• Overtime potential and
imbursement
compensation
• Family leave
• Flexible hours and work-
from-home options • Child-care or elder-care benefits
• Fitness or wellness benefits
• Health, dental, optical or eye
care, disability, and life • Discounts on company
insurance products and services
You might find it most comfortable to respond to an initial offer in
writing and then meet later with the potential employer for further ne-
gotiation. If possible, indicate all of your preferences and requirements
at one time instead of continually asking for new and different benefits
as you negotiate. Throughout this process, focus on what is most im-
portant to you (which might differ from what is most important to your
friends) and on what you would find acceptable and comfortable.
scope
Scope is the depth and breadth of detail you include in a document as
defined by your audience’s needs, your purpose, and the context. (See
also audience.) For example, if you write a trip report about a routine
visit to a company facility, your readers may need to know only the
basic details and any unusual findings. However, if you prepare a trip
report about a visit to a division that has experienced problems and your
purpose is to suggest ways to solve those problems, your report will con-
S
tain many more details, observations, and even recommendations.
You should determine the scope of a document during the prepara-
tion stage of the writing process, even though you may refine it later.
Defining your scope will expedite your researchand can help determine
team members’ responsibilities in collaborative writing.
Your scope will also be affected by the type of document you are
writing as well as the medium you select for your message. For example,
government agencies often prescribe the general content and length for
proposals, and some organizations set limits for the length of memosand
e-mails. See selectingthe mediumand “Five Steps to Successful Writing.”

=== Page 527 ===
HTW_ch0S.qxp 8/22/08 8:55 AM Page 494
494 selecting the medium
selecting the medium
With so many media and forms of communication available, selecting
the most appropriate can be challenging. Which electronic or paper
medium is best, for example, depends on a wide range of factors related
to your audience, your purpose, and the contextof the communication.*
Those factors include the following:
• the audience’s preferences and expectations
• an individual’s personal work style
• how widely information needs to be distributed
• what kind of record you need to keep
• the urgency of the communication
• the sensitivity or confidentiality required
• the technological resources available
• the organizational practices or regulations
As this partial list suggests, choosing the best medium may involve per-
sonal considerations, such as your own strengths as a communicator. If
you need to collaborate with someone to solve a problem, for example,
you may find e-mail exchanges less effective than a phone call or face-
to-face meeting. Other considerations may depend more on the purpose
or context of the communication. If you need precise wording or a
record of a complex or sensitive message, for example, using a written
medium is often essential.
The following descriptions of typical media and forms of commu-
nication and their functions will help you select the most appropriate
for your needs.
Letters
Business letters with handwritten signatures are often the most appro-
priate choice for formal communications with professional associates or
S customers outside an organization. Letters are often used for job appli-
cations, for recommendations, and in other official and social contexts.
Letters printed on organizational letterhead stationery communicate
formality, respect, and authority.
Memos
Memos are appropriate for internal communication among members of
the same organization; they use a standard header and are sent on paper
or as attachments to e-mails. Many organizations use e-mail rather than
*Some refer to this process as selecting the best “channel” for communication.

=== Page 528 ===
HTW_ch0S.qxp 8/22/08 8:55 AM Page 495
selecting the medium 495
memos for routine internal communications; however, organizations
may use memos printed on organizational stationery when they need to
communicate with the formality and authority of business letters. Memos
may also be used in manufacturing or service industries, for example,
where employees do not have easy access to e-mail. In such cases, memos
can be used to instruct employees, announce policies, report results, dis-
seminate information, and delegate responsibilities.
E-mail
E-mail (or email) functions in the workplace as a primary medium to
communicate and share electronic files with colleagues, clients, and cus-
tomers. Although e-mail messages may function as informal notes, they
should follow the writing strategy and style described in correspon-
dence. Because e-mail recipients can easily forward messages and at-
tachments to others and because e-mail messages are subject to legal
disclosure, e-mail requires writers to review their messages carefully be-
fore clicking the “Send” button.
InstantMessages
Instantmessaging(IM) on a computer or cell phone may be an efficient
way to communicate in real time with coworkers, suppliers, and cus-
tomers—especially those at sites without access to e-mail. Instant mes-
saging often uses online slang and such shortened spellings as “u” for
youto save screen space on a cell phone. Instant messaging is obviously
limited because recipients must be ready and willing to participate in an
online conversation.
Telephone Calls
Telephone calls are best used for exchanges that require substantial in-
teraction and the ability of participants to interpret each other’s tone of
voice. They are useful for discussing sensitive issues and resolving mis-
understandings, although they do not provide the visual cues possible
during face-to-face meetings. Cell (or mobile) phones are useful for
S
communicating away from an office, but users should follow appropri-
ate etiquette and organizational policies, such as speaking in an appro-
priate tone and switching to the vibrate mode during meetings.*
A teleconference, or conference call among three or more partici-
pants, is a less expensive alternative to face-to-face meetings requiring
travel. Such conference calls work best when the person coordinating
the call works from an agenda shared by all the participants and directs
the discussion as if chairing a meeting. Participants can use the Web
*Based on LetsTalk.com’s cell-phone etiquette survey and resulting guidelines at
www.letstalk.com/promo/unclecell/unclecell2.htm.

=== Page 529 ===
HTW_ch0S.qxp 8/22/08 8:55 AM Page 496
496 selecting the medium
during conference calls to share and view common documents. Confer-
ence calls in which decisions have been reached should be followed
with written confirmation.
Voice-mail messages should be clear and brief. (“I got your pack-
age, so you don’t need to call the distributor.”) If the message is compli-
cated or contains numerous details, use another medium, such as e-mail.
If you want to discuss a subject at length, let the recipient know the
subject so that he or she can prepare a response before returning your
call. When you leave a message, give your name and contact informa-
tion as well as the date and time of the call (if you are unsure whether
the message will be time-stamped).
Faxes
A fax is most useful when the information—a drawing or signed con-
tract, for example—must be viewed in its original form. Faxes are also
useful when the recipient either does not have e-mail or prefers faxed
documents. Fax machines in offices can be located in shared areas, so
call the intended recipient before you send confidential or sensitive mes-
sages.
Meetings
In-person meetings are most appropriate for initial or early contacts
with associates and clients with whom you intend to develop an impor-
tant, long-term relationship or need to establish rapport. Meetings may
also be best for brainstorming, negotiating, interviewing someone on a
complex topic, solving a technical problem, or handling a controversial
issue. For advice on how to record discussions and decisions, see min-
utes of meetings.
Videoconferences
Videoconferences are particularly useful for meetings when travel is im-
practical. Unlike telephone conference calls, videoconferences have the
S
advantage of allowing participants to see as well as to hear one another.
Videoconferences work best with participants who are at ease in front
of the camera and when the facilities offer good production quality.
Web Sites
A public Internet or company intranet Web site is ideal for posting an-
nouncements or policies as well as for making available or exchanging
documents and files with others. Your Web site can serve not only as a
home base for resources but also as a place where ideas can be devel-

=== Page 530 ===
HTW_ch0S.qxp 8/22/08 8:55 AM Page 497
semicolons 497
oped through, for example, discussion boards, blogs,* and wikis. See
also collaborative writing, writing for the Web, Web design, and Digital
Tip: Wikis for Collaborative Documentson page 72.
semicolons
The semicolon (;) links independent clauses or other sentence elements
of equal weight and grammatical rank when they are not joined by a
comma and a conjunction. The semicolon indicates a greater pause be-
tween clauses than does a comma but not as great a pause as a period.
Independent clauses joined by a semicolon should balance or con-
trast with each other, and the relationship between the two statements
should be so clear that further explanation is not necessary.
(cid:2) The new Web site was a success; every division reported increased
online sales.
Do not use a semicolon between a dependent clause and its main clause.
,
(cid:2) No one applied for the position/; even though it was heavily
^
advertised.
With Strong Connectives
In complicated sentences, a semicolon may be used before transitional
words or phrases(that is, for example, namely) that introduce examples
or further explanation. See also transition.
(cid:2) The press understands Commissioner Curran’s position on the
issue;that is, local funds should not be used for the highway
project.
A semicolon should also be used before conjunctive adverbs (therefore,
S
moreover, consequently, furthermore, indeed, in fact, however) that
connect independent clauses.
(cid:2) The test results are not complete; therefore, I cannot make a
recommendation.
[The semicolon in the example shows that thereforebelongs
to the second clause.]
*A blog (short for “Web log”) functions like a journal or diary and often includes
commentary, discussion, or news on a particular subject.

=== Page 531 ===
HTW_ch0S.qxp 8/22/08 8:55 AM Page 498
498 sentence construction
For Clarity in Long Sentences
Use a semicolon between two independent clauses connected by a coor-
dinating conjunction (and, but, for, or, nor, so, yet) if the clauses are
long and contain other punctuation.
(cid:2) In most cases, these individuals are executives, bankers, or lawyers;
butthey do not, as the press seems to believe, simply push the but-
ton of their economic power to affect local politics.
A semicolon may also be used if any items in a series contain commas.
(cid:2) Among those present were John Howard, president of the Omega
Paper Company; Carol Delgado, president of Environex Corpora-
tion; and Larry Stanley, president of Stanley Papers.
Use parentheses or dashes, not semicolons, to enclose a parenthetical
element that contains commas.
(cid:2) All affected job classifications (receptionist, secretary, transcrip-
tionist, and clerk) will be upgraded this month.
Use a colon, not a semicolon, as a mark of anticipation or enumeration.
:
(cid:2) Three decontamination methods are under consideration/; a
^
zeolite-resin system, an evaporation system, and a filtration system.
The semicolon always appears outside closing quotation marks.
(cid:2) The attorney said, “You must be accurate”;her client replied,
“I will.”
sentence construction
DIRECTORY
S Subjects 499 Intention 501
Predicates 500 Stylistic Use 501
Sentence Types 500 Constructing Effective Sentences 501
Structure 500
A sentence is the most fundamental and versatile tool available to writ-
ers. Sentences generally flow from a subject to a verb to any objects,
complements, or modifiers, but they can be ordered in a variety of ways
to achieve emphasis. When shifting word order for emphasis, however,
be aware that word order can make a great difference in the meaning of
a sentence.

=== Page 532 ===
HTW_ch0S.qxp 8/22/08 8:55 AM Page 499
sentence construction 499
(cid:2) He was onlythe service technician.
(cid:2) He was the onlyservice technician.
The most basic components of sentences are subjects and predicates.
Subjects
The subjectof a sentence is a nounor pronoun(and its modifiers) about
which the predicate of the sentence makes a statement. Although a sub-
ject may appear anywhere in a sentence, it most often appears at the be-
ginning. (“The wiringis defective.”) Grammatically, a subject must agree
with its verb in number.
(cid:2) These departments havemuch in common.
(cid:2) This department hasseveral functions.
The subject is the actor in sentences using the active voice.
(cid:2) The Webmaster reportedan increase in site visits for May.
ESL TIPSfor Understanding the Subjectof a Sentence
In English, every sentence, except commands, must have an explicit
subject.
He established
(cid:2) Paulworked fast. Establishedthe parameters for the project.
^
In commands,the subjectyouis understood and is used only for em-
phasis.
(cid:2) (You) Show up at the airport at 6:30 tomorrow morning.
(cid:2) (You) Do your homework, young man. [parent to child]
If you move the subjectfrom its normal position (subject-verb-object),
English often requires you to replace the subject with an expletive
(there, it).In this construction,the verb agrees with the subjectthatfol-
lows it.
(cid:2) There aretwo files on the desk. [The subject is files.] S
(cid:2) It ispresumptuous for me to speak for Jim.
[The subject is to speak for Jim.]
Time,distance,weather,temperature,and environmental expressions
use itas their subject.
(cid:2) Itis ten o’clock.
(cid:2) Itis ten miles down the road.
(cid:2) Itseldom snows in Florida.
(cid:2) Itis very hot in Jorge’s office.

=== Page 533 ===
HTW_ch0S.qxp 8/22/08 8:55 AM Page 500
500 sentence construction
A compound subject has two or more substantives (nouns or noun
equivalents) as the subject of one verb.
(cid:2) The doctorand the nurseagreed on a treatment plan.
Predicates
The predicate is the part of a sentence that makes an assertion about
the subject and completes the thought of the sentence.
(cid:2) Bill has piloted the corporate jet.
The simple predicate is the verb and any helping verbs (has piloted).
The complete predicate is the verb and any modifiers, objects, or com-
plements (has piloted the corporate jet). A compound predicateconsists
of two or more verbs with the same subject.
(cid:2) The company triedbut did not succeedin that field.
Such constructions help achieve conciseness in writing. A predicate
nominative is a noun construction that follows a linking verb and re-
names the subject.
(cid:2) She is my attorney. [noun]
(cid:2) His excuse was that he had been sick. [noun clause]
Sentence Types
Sentences may be classified according to structure (simple, compound,
complex, compound-complex); intention(declarative, interrogative, im-
perative, exclamatory); and stylistic use(loose, periodic, minor).
Structure. A simple sentenceconsists of one independent clause. At its
most basic, a simple sentence contains only a subject and a predicate.
(cid:2) The power [subject] failed [predicate].
A compound sentenceconsists of two or more independent clauses con-
nected by a comma and a coordinating conjunction, by a semicolon, or
S
by a semicolon and a conjunctive adverb.
(cid:2) Drilling is the only way to collect samples of the layers of sediment
below the ocean floor, butit is not the only way to gather informa-
tion about these strata. [comma and coordinating conjunction]
(cid:2) The chemical composition of seawater bears little resemblance to
that of river water;the various elements are present in entirely dif-
ferent proportions. [semicolon]
(cid:2) It was 500 miles to the site; therefore, we made arrangements to
fly. [semicolon and conjunctive adverb]

=== Page 534 ===
HTW_ch0S.qxp 8/22/08 8:55 AM Page 501
sentence construction 501
A complex sentence contains one independent clause and at least one
dependent clause that expresses a subordinate idea.
(cid:2) The generator will shut off automatically [independent clause] if
the temperature rises above a specified point [dependent clause].
A compound-complex sentence consists of two or more independent
clauses plus at least one dependent clause.
(cid:2) Productivity is central to controlling inflation [independent clause];
when productivity rises [dependent clause], employers can raise
wages without raising prices [independent clause].
Intention. A declarative sentenceconveys information or makes a fac-
tual statement. (“The motor powers the conveyor belt.”) An interrogative
sentence asks a direct question. (“Does the conveyor belt run con-
stantly?”) An imperative sentence issues a command. (“Restart in MS-
DOS mode.”) An exclamatory sentence is an emphatic expression of
feeling, fact, or opinion. It is a declarative sentence that is stated with
great feeling. (“The files were deleted!”)
Stylistic Use. A loose sentence makes its major point at the beginning
and then adds subordinate phrases and clauses that develop or modify
that major point. A loose sentence could end at one or more points be-
fore it actually does end, as the periods in brackets illustrate in the fol-
lowing sentence:
(cid:2) It went up[.], a great ball of fire about a mile in diameter[.], an ele-
mental force freed from its bonds[.] after being chained for billions
of years.
A periodic sentence delays its main ideas until the end by presenting
subordinate ideas or modifiers first.
(cid:2) During the last century, the attitude of the American citizen toward
automation underwent a profound change.
S
A minor sentenceis an incomplete sentence that makes sense in its con-
text because the missing element is clearly implied by the preceding sen-
tence.
(cid:2) In view of these facts, is the service contract really useful? Or
economical?
Constructing Effective Sentences
The subject-verb-object pattern is effective because it is most familiar to
readers. In “The company increased profits,” we know the subject

=== Page 535 ===
HTW_ch0S.qxp 8/22/08 8:55 AM Page 502
502 sentence construction
(company) and the object (profits) by their positions relative to the verb
(increased).
An inverted sentence places the elements in unexpected order, thus
emphasizing the point by attracting the readers’ attention.
(cid:2) A better job I never had. [direct object-subject-verb]
(cid:2) More optimistic I have never been.
[subjective complement-subject-linking verb]
(cid:2) A poor image we presented. [complement-subject-verb]
Use uncomplicated sentences to state complex ideas. If readers have
to cope with a complicated sentence in addition to a complex idea, they
are likely to become confused. Just as simpler sentences make complex
ideas more digestible, a complex sentence construction makes a series
of simple ideas more smooth and less choppy.
Avoid loading sentences with a number of thoughts carelessly
tacked together. Such sentences are monotonous and hard to read be-
cause all the ideas seem to be of equal importance. Rather, distinguish
the relative importance of sentence elements with subordination. See
also garbled sentences.
LOADED We started the program three years ago, only three
members were on the staff, and each member was re-
sponsible for a separate state, but it was not an efficient
operation.
IMPROVED When we started the program three years ago, only three
members were on the staff, each responsible for a sepa-
rate state; however, that arrangement was not efficient.
Express coordinate or equivalent ideas in similar form. The struc-
ture of the sentence helps readers grasp the similarity of its components,
as illustrated in parallel structure.
ESL TIPSfor Understanding the Requirements of a Sentence
S • A sentence muststartwith a capital letter.
• A sentence mustend with a period,a question mark,or an excla-
mationpoint.
• A sentence musthave a subject.
• A sentence musthave a verb.
• A sentence mustconform to subject-verb-objectword order (or
inverted word order for questions or emphasis).
• A sentence mustexpress an idea thatcan stand on its own (called
the main,or independent,clause).

=== Page 536 ===
HTW_ch0S.qxp 8/22/08 8:55 AM Page 503
sentence faults 503
sentence faults
A number of problems can create sentence faults, including faulty sub-
ordination, clauseswith no subjects, rambling sentences, omitted verbs,
and illogical assertions.
Faulty subordinationoccurs when a grammatically subordinate ele-
ment contains the main idea of the sentence or when a subordinate ele-
ment is so long or detailed that it obscures the main idea. Both of the
following sentences are logical, depending on what the writer intends as
the main idea and as the subordinate element.
(cid:2) Although the new filing system saves money, many of the staff are
unhappy with it.
[If the main point is that many of the staff are unhappy, this sen-
tence is correct.]
(cid:2) The new filing system saves money, although many of the staff are
unhappy with it.
[If the main point is that the new filing system saves money, this
sentence is correct.]
In the following example, the subordinate element overwhelms the
main point.
FAULTY Because the noise level in the assembly area on a
typical shift is as loud as a smoke detector’s alarm
ten feet away, employees often develop hearing
problems.
IMPROVED Employees in the assembly area often develop
hearing problems because the noise level on a typical
shift is as loud as a smoke detector’s alarm ten feet
away.
Missing subjects occur when writers inappropriately assume a subject
that they do not state in the clause. See also sentence fragments.
INCOMPLETE Your application program can request to end the ses- S
sion after the next command.
[Your application program can request whoor what
to end the session?]
COMPLETE Your application program can request the host pro-
gramto end the session after the next command.
Rambling sentencescontain more information than the reader can com-
fortably absorb. The obvious remedy for a rambling sentence is to di-
vide it into two or more sentences. When you do that, put the main
message of the rambling sentence into the first of the revised sentences.

=== Page 537 ===
HTW_ch0S.qxp 8/22/08 8:55 AM Page 504
504 sentence fragments
RAMBLING The payment to which a subcontractor is entitled
should be made promptly in order that in the event of
a subsequent contractual dispute we, as general con-
tractors, may not be held in default of our contract by
virtue of nonpayment.
DIRECT Pay subcontractors promptly. Then if a contractual
dispute occurs, we cannot be held in default of our
contract because of nonpayment.
Missing verbs produce some sentence faults.
written
(cid:2) I never haveand probably never will write the annual report.
^
Faulty logic results when a predicate makes an illogical assertion about
its subject. “Mr. Wilson’s jobis a sales representative” is not logical, but
“Mr. Wilson is a sales representative” is logical. “Jim’s height is six feet
tall” is not logical, but “Jimis six feet tall” is logical. See also logic errors.
sentence fragments
A sentence fragment is an incomplete grammatical unit that is punctu-
ated as a sentence.
FRAGMENT And quit his job.
SENTENCE He quit his job.
A sentence fragment lacks either a subject or a verb or is a subordinate
clause or phrase. Sentence fragments are often introduced by relative
pronouns(who, whom, which, that) or subordinating conjunctions(such
as although, because, if, when, and while).
, although
(cid:2) The new manager instituted several new procedures. Althoughshe
^
S didn’t clear them with Human Resources.
A sentence must contain a finite verb; verbals (nonfinite) do not func-
tion as verbs. The following sentence fragments use verbals (providing,
to work) that cannot function as finite verbs.
FRAGMENT Providingall employees with disability insurance.
SENTENCE The company providesall employees with disability
insurance.
FRAGMENT To worka 40-hour week.
SENTENCE Most of our employees must worka 40-hour week.

=== Page 538 ===
HTW_ch0S.qxp 8/22/08 8:55 AM Page 505
sentence variety 505
Explanatory phrases beginning with such as, for example, and similar
terms often lead writers to create sentence fragments.
, such as
(cid:2) The staff wants additional benefits. For example,the use of
^
company cars.
A hopelessly snarled fragment simply must be rewritten. To rewrite
such a fragment, pull the main points out of the fragment, list them in the
proper sequence, and then rewrite the sentence as illustrated in garbled
sentences. See also sentence constructionand sentence faults.
sentence variety
Sentences can vary in length, structure, and complexity. As you revise,
vary your sentences so that they do not become tiresomely alike. See
also sentence construction.
Sentence Length
A series of sentences of the same length is monotonous, so varying sen-
tence length makes writing less tedious to the reader. For example,
avoid stringing together a number of short independent clauses. Either
connect them with subordinating connectives, thereby making some de-
pendent clauses, or make some clauses into separate sentences. See also
subordination.
STRING The river is 63 miles long, and it averages 50 yards
in width, and its depth averages 8 feet.
IMPROVED The river, which is 63 miles long and averages
50 yards in width, has an average depth of 8 feet.
IMPROVED The river is 63 miles long. It averages 50 yards in
width and 8 feet in depth.
You can often effectively combine short sentences by converting verbs S
into adjectives.
failed
(cid:2) Thedigital shift indicator failed. Itwas pulled from the market.
^
Although too many short sentences make your writing sound choppy
and immature, a short sentence can be effective following a long one.
(cid:2) During the past two decades, many changes have occurred in
American life—the extent, durability, and significance of which
no one has yet measured. No one can.

=== Page 539 ===
HTW_ch0S.qxp 8/22/08 8:55 AM Page 506
506 sentence variety
In general, short sentences are good for emphatic, memorable state-
ments. Long sentences are good for detailed explanations and support.
Nothing is inherently wrong with a long sentence, or even with a com-
plicated one, as long as its meaning is clear and direct. Sentence length
becomes an element of style when varied for emphasis or contrast; a
conspicuously short or long sentence can be used to good effect.
Word Order
When a series of sentences all begin in exactly the same way (usually
with an article and a noun), the result is likely to be monotonous. You
can make your sentences more interesting by occasionally starting with
a modifying word, phrase, or clause.
(cid:2) To salvage the project, she presented alternatives when existing
policies failed to produce results. [modifying phrase]
However, overuse of this technique itself can be monotonous, so use it
in moderation.
Inverted word order can be an effective way to achieve variety, but
be careful not to create an awkward construction.
AWKWARD Then occurred the event that gained us the contract.
EFFECTIVE Never have sales been so good.
For variety, you can alter normal sentence order by inserting a phrase
or clause.
(cid:2) Titanium fills the gap, both in weight and in strength, between
aluminum and steel.
The technique of inserting a phrase or clause is good for achieving em-
phasis, providing detail, breaking monotony, and regulating pace.
S
Loose and Periodic Sentences
A loose sentence makes its major point at the beginning and then adds
subordinate phrases and clauses that develop or modify the point. A
loose sentence could end at one or more points before it actually ends,
as the periods in brackets illustrate in the following example:
(cid:2) It went up[.], a great ball of fire about a mile in diameter[.], an
elemental force freed from its bonds[.] after being chained for
billions of years.

=== Page 540 ===
HTW_ch0S.qxp 8/22/08 8:55 AM Page 507
service 507
A periodic sentence delays its main idea until the end by presenting
modifiers or subordinate ideas first, thus holding the readers’ interest
until the end.
(cid:2) During the last century, the attitude of Americans toward technol-
ogy underwent a profound change.
Experiment with shifts from loose sentences to periodic sentences in
your own writing, especially during revision. Avoid the singsong mo-
notony of a long series of loose sentences, particularly a series contain-
ing coordinate clauses joined by conjunctions. Subordinating some
thoughts to others not only provides emphasis but also makes your sen-
tences more interesting.
sequential method of development
The sequential, or step-by-step, method of developmentis especially ef-
fective for explaining a process or describing a mechanism in operation.
(See process explanation.) It is also the logical method for writing in-
structions, as shown in Figure I–5 on page 261.
The main advantage of the sequential method of development is
that it is easy to follow because the steps correspond to the process or
operation being described. The disadvantages are that it can become
monotonous and does not lend itself well to achieving emphasis.
Most methods of development have elements of sequence to a
greater or lesser extent. The chronological method of development, for
example, is also sequential: To describe a trip chronologically, from be-
ginning to end, is also to describe it sequentially. The cause-and-effect
method of development may contain certain elements of sequence. For
example, a report of the causes leading to an accident (the effect) might
describe those causes in the order they occurred (or their sequence).
S
service
When used as a verb, service means “keep up or maintain” as well as
“repair.” (“Our company will service your equipment.”) If you mean
“provide a more general benefit,” use serve.
serves
(cid:2) Our company servicesthe northwest area of the state.
^

=== Page 541 ===
HTW_ch0S.qxp 8/22/08 8:55 AM Page 508
508 set/ sit
set / sit
Sitis an intransitive verb; it does not, therefore, require an object. (“I sit
by a window in the office.”) Its past tense is sat. (“We sat around the
conference table.”) Set is usually a transitive verb, meaning “put or
place,” “establish,” or “harden.” Its past tense is set.
(cid:2) Please setthe supplies on the shelf.
(cid:2) The jeweler setthe stone carefully.
(cid:2) Can we seta date for the meeting?
(cid:2) The high temperature setsthe epoxy quickly.
Setis occasionally an intransitive verb.
(cid:2) The new adhesive setsin five minutes.
shall / will
Although traditionally shallwas used to express the future tensewith I
and we, will is generally accepted with all persons. Shall is commonly
used today only in questions requesting an opinion or a preference
(“Shall we go?”) rather than a prediction (“Will we go?”). It is also
used in statements expressing determination (“I shall return!”) or in
formal regulations that express a requirement (“Applicants shall pro-
vide a proof of certification”).
slashes
The slash (/)—called a variety of names, including slant line, diagonal,
virgule, bar, and solidus—both separates and shows omission.
S
The slash can indicate alternatives or combinations.
(cid:2) David’s telephone numbers are (800) 549-2278/2235.
(cid:2) Check the on/off switch before you leave.
The slash often indicates omitted words and letters.
(cid:2) miles/hour (miles per hour); w/o (without)
In fractions and mathematical expressions, the slash separates the nu-
merator from the denominator (3/4 for three-fourths; x/yfor xover y).

=== Page 542 ===
HTW_ch0S.qxp 8/22/08 8:55 AM Page 509
some / somewhat 509
Although the slash is used informally with dates(5/9/09), avoid this
form in technical writing, especially in international correspondence.
The forward slash often separates items in URL (uniform resource
locator) addresses for sites on the Internet (bedfordstmartins.com/
alredtech). The backward slash is used to separate parts of file names
(c:\myfiles\reports\annual09.doc).
so / so that / such
Avoid soas a substitute for because. See also as / because / since.
Because she
(cid:2) Shereads faster, soshe finished before I did.
^
Do not replace the phrase so thatwith soor such that.
so that
(cid:2) The report should be written such thatit can be widely understood.
^
Such, an adjectivemeaning “of this or that kind,” should never be used
as a pronoun.
(cid:2) Our company provides on-site child care, but I do not anticipate
it.
using such.
^
some / somewhat
When somefunctions as an indefinite pronounfor a plural count nounor
as an indefinite adjectivemodifying a plural count noun, use a plural verb.
(cid:2) Someof us areprepared to work overtime.
(cid:2) Somepeople aremore productive than others.
S
Someis singular, however, when used with mass nouns.
(cid:2) Somesand hastrickled through the crack.
(cid:2) Most of the water evaporated, but some remains.
When someis used as an adjective or a pronoun meaning “an undeter-
mined quantity” or “certain unspecified persons,” it should be replaced
by the adverbsomewhat, which means “to some extent.”
somewhat.
(cid:2) His writing has improved some.
^

=== Page 543 ===
HTW_ch0S.qxp 8/22/08 8:55 AM Page 510
510 some time / sometime / sometimes
some time / sometime / sometimes
Some timerefers to a duration of time. (“We waited for some timebefore
making the decision.”) Sometime refers to an unknown or unspecified
time. (“We will visit with you sometime.”) Sometimesrefers to occasional
occurrences at unspecified times. (“He sometimes visits the branch of-
fices.”)
spatial method of development
The spatial method of development describes an object or a process ac-
cording to the physical arrangement of its features. Depending on the
subject, you describe its features from bottom to top, side to side, east to
west, outside to inside, and so on. Descriptions of this kind rely mainly
on dimension (height, width, length), direction (up, down, north, south),
shape (rectangular, square, semicircular), and proportion (one-half, two-
thirds). Features are described in relation to one another or to their sur-
roundings, as illustrated in Figure S–1, which might be written by a
home inspector or crime-scene investigator. The description in Figure
S–1 relies on a bottom-to-top, clockwise (south to west to north to east)
sequence, beginning with the front door. Such descriptions often benefit
from visuals, such as drawings, that can provide overviews and details.
The spatial method of development might be used for descriptions
of warehouse inventory, proposalsfor landscape work, construction-site
progress and activity reports, and, in combination with a step-by-step
sequence, many types of instructions.
specifications
A specification is a detailed and an exact statement that prescribes the
materials, dimensions, and quality of something to be built, installed, or
manufactured.
S The two broad categories of specifications—industrial and govern-
ment—both require precision. A specification must be written clearly
and precisely and state explicitly what is needed. Because of the strin-
gent requirements of specifications, careful researchand preparationare
especially important before you begin to write, as is careful revision
after you have completed the draft. See also clarityand ambiguity.
Industrial Specifications
Industrial specifications are used, for example, in software develop-
ment, in which there are no engineering drawings or other means of

=== Page 544 ===
HTW_ch0S.qxp 8/22/08 8:55 AM Page 511
spatial method of development 511
DESCRIPTION
Interior of Two-Story, Six-Room House
Ground Floor
Front hall and stairwell.The front door faces south and opens
into a hallway seven feet deep and ten feet wide. At the end of
the hallway is a stairwell that begins on the right-hand (east) side
of the hallway, rises five steps to a landing, and reverses direc-
tion at the left-hand (west) side of the hallway.
Dining room.To the left (west) of the hallway is the dining room,
which measures 15 feet along its southern exposure and ten feet
along its western exposure.
Kitchen.North of the dining room is the kitchen, which mea-
sures ten feet along its western exposure and 15 feet along its
northern exposure.
Bathroom.East of the kitchen, along the northern side of the
house, is a bathroom that measures ten feet (west to east) by
fivefeet.
Living room.Parallel to the bathroom is a passageway the same
size as the bathroom and leading from the kitchen to the living
room. The living room (15 feet west to east by 20 feet north to
south) occupies the entire eastern end of the floor.
Second Floor
Hallway.On the second floor, at the top of the stairs, is an
L-shaped hallway, five feet wide. The base of the L, over the
door, is 15 feet long. The vertical arm of the L is 13 feet long.
Southwest bedroom.To the west of the hall is the southwest
bedroom, which measures ten feet along its southern exposure
and eight feet along its western exposure.
Northwest bedroom.Directly to the north, over the kitchen, S
is the northwest bedroom, which measures 12 feet along its
western exposure and ten feet along its northern exposure.
FIGURES–1. Spatial Method of Development

=== Page 545 ===
HTW_ch0S.qxp 8/22/08 8:55 AM Page 512
512 spelling
documentation. An industrial specification is a permanent record that
documents the item being developed so that it can be maintained by
someone other than the person who designed it and provides detailed
technical information about the item to all who need it (engineers, tech-
nical writers, technical instructors, etc.).
The industrial specification describes a planned project, a newly
completed project, or an old project. The specification for each type of
project must contain detailed technical descriptions of all aspects of the
project: what was done and how it was done, as well as what is re-
quired to use the item, how it is used, what its function is, who would
use it, and so on.
GovernmentSpecifications
Government agencies are required by law to contract for equipment
strictly according to definitions provided in formal specifications. A
government specification is a precise definition of exactly what the con-
tractor is to provide. In addition to a technical description of the item
to be purchased, the specification normally includes an estimated cost;
an estimated delivery date; and standards for the design, manufacture,
quality, testing, training of government employees, governing codes, in-
spection, and delivery of the item.
Government specifications contain details on the scope of the proj-
ect; documents the contractor is required to furnish with the device;
required product characteristics and functional performance of the de-
vice; required tests, test equipment, and test procedures; required
preparations for delivery; notes; and appendixes. These specifications
appear in requests for proposals, which prescribe the content and
deadline for government proposalssubmitted by vendors bidding on a
project.
spelling
S
Because spelling errors in your documents will damage your credibility,
careful proofreading is essential. The use of a spell checker is crucial;
however, it will not catch all mistakes, especially those in personal and
company names. It cannot detect a spelling error if the error results in a
valid word; for example, if you mean tobut inadvertently type too, the
spell checker will not detect the error. Likewise, spell checkers will not
detect errors in the names of people, places, and organizations. If you
are unsure about the spelling of a word, do not rely on guesswork or a
spell checker—consult a standard dictionaryor style guide.

=== Page 546 ===
HTW_ch0S.qxp 8/22/08 8:55 AM Page 513
style 513
strata / stratum
Stratais the plural form of stratum, meaning “a layer of material.”
(cid:2) The land’s strataare exposed by erosion.
(cid:2) Each stratumis clearly visible in the cliff.
style
A dictionary definition of style is “the way in which something is said
or done, as distinguished from its substance.” Writers’ styles are deter-
mined by the way writers think and transfer their thoughts to paper—
the way they use words, sentences, images, figures of speech, and so on.
A writer’s style is the way his or her language functions in particu-
lar situations. For example, an e-mail to a friend would be relaxed,
even chatty, in tone, whereas a job application letterwould be more re-
strained and formal. Obviously, the style appropriate to one situation
would not be appropriate to the other. In both situations, the audience,
the purpose, and the context determine the manner or style the writer
adopts. Beyond an individual’s personal style, various kinds of writing
have distinct stylistic traits, such as technical writing style.
Standard English can be divided into two broad categories of style—
formal and informal—according to how it functions in certain situa-
tions. Understanding the distinction between formal and informal writing
styles helps writers use the appropriate style. We must recognize, how-
ever, that no clear-cut line divides the two categories and that some writ-
ing may call for a combination of the two. See also English,varieties of.
Formal Writing Style
A formal writing style can perhaps best be defined by pointing to cer-
tain material that is clearly formal, such as scholarly and scientific ar-
ticles in professional journals, lectures read at meetings of professional
S
societies, and legal documents. Material written in a formal style is usu-
ally the work of a specialist writing to other specialists or writing that
embodies laws or regulations. As a result, the vocabulary is specialized
and precise. The writer’s tone is impersonal and objective because the
subject matter looms larger in the writing than does the author’s per-
sonality. (See pointof view.) A formal writing style does not use contrac-
tions, slang, or dialect. Because the material generally examines com-
plex ideas, the sentence constructionmay be elaborate.
Formal writing need not be dull and lifeless. By using such tech-
niques as the active voice whenever possible, sentence variety, and

=== Page 547 ===
HTW_ch0S.qxp 8/22/08 8:55 AM Page 514
514 style
subordination, a writer can make formal writing lively and interesting,
especially if the subject matter is inherently interesting to readers. In the
following example, a physicist uses a concept that is taken for granted
(distance) to show how definitions are important in science.
(cid:2) Distance is such a basic concept in our understanding of the world
that it is easy to underestimate the depth of its subtlety. With the
surprising effects that special and general relativity have had on
our notions of space and time, and the new features arising from
string theory, we are led to be a bit more careful even in our defi-
nition of distance. The most meaningful definitions in physics are
those that are operational—that is, definitions that provide a
means, at least in principle, for measuring whatever is being de-
fined. After all, no matter how abstract a concept is, having an
operational definition allows us to boil down its meaning to an
experimental procedure for measuring its value.
—Brian Greene, The Elegant Universe: Superstrings, Hidden
Dimensions, and the Quest for the Ultimate Theory
Whether you should use a formal style in a particular instance depends
on your readers and purpose. When writers attempt to force a formal
style when it should not be used, their writing is likely to fall victim to
affectation, awkwardness, and gobbledygook.
Informal Writing Style
An informal writing style is a relaxed and colloquial way of writing
standard English. It is the style found in most personal e-mail and in
some business correspondence, nonfiction books of general interest, and
mass-circulation magazines. There is less distance between the writer
and the reader because the tone is more personal than in a formal writ-
ing style. Consider the following passage, written in an informal style,
from a nonfiction book on statistics.
S
(cid:2) After a few months of reading risk statistics, I had a curious expe-
rience one morning, an epiphany of sorts. At the time, however, I
felt more like Alice in Wonderland after taking a sip of the “Drink
Me” potion. When I opened my eyes in bed and began to con-
template my day, I began to see it not in terms of what I had to
accomplish but in terms of the risks that I would encounter. The
world suddenly started looking different.
—John F. Ross, The Polar Bear Strategy:
Reflections on Risk in Modern Life

=== Page 548 ===
HTW_ch0S.qxp 8/22/08 8:55 AM Page 515
style 515
As the example illustrates, the vocabulary of an informal writing style is
made up of generally familiar rather than unfamiliar words and expres-
sions, although slang and dialect are usually avoided. An informal style
approximates the cadence and structure of spoken English while con-
forming to the grammatical conventions of written English.
Writers who consciously attempt to create a distinctive style usually
defeat their purpose. Attempting to impress readers with a flashy writ-
ing style can lead to affectation; attempting to impress them with scien-
tific objectivity can produce a style that is dull and lifeless. Technical
writing need be neither affected nor dull. It can and should be simple,
clear, direct, even interesting—the key is to master basic writing skills
and always to keep your readers in mind. What will be both informa-
tive and interesting to your readers? When that question is uppermost
in your mind as you apply the steps of the writing process, you will
achieve an interesting and informative writing style. See “Five Steps to
Successful Writing.”
WRITER’S CHECKLIST Developing an Effective Style
(cid:3)
Use the active voice—notexclusively butas much as possible without
becoming awkward or illogical.
(cid:3)
Use parallel structurewhenever a sentence or listpresents two or
more thoughts of equal importance.
(cid:3)
Vary structures to avoid a monotonous style.
(cid:3)
Avoid stating positive thoughts in negative terms (write “40 percent
responded”instead of “60 percentfailed to respond”).See also posi-
tive writingand ethics in writing.
(cid:3)
Concentrate on achieving the proper balance between emphasisand
subordination.
S
WEB LINK Style Guides
Style guides,such as The Chicago Manual of Styleand the Associated
Press Stylebook and Briefing on Media Law,provide specific and some-
times varied advice for handling issues of usage,style,and formats for
citations,correspondence,and documents.For a selected listof such
style guides,see bedfordstmartins.com/alredtechand selectLinks for
Handbook Entries.

=== Page 549 ===
HTW_ch0S.qxp 8/22/08 8:55 AM Page 516
516 subordination
subordination
Use subordination to show, by the structure of a sentence, the appropri-
ate relationship between ideas of unequal importance. Subordination
allows you to emphasize your main idea by putting less important ideas
in subordinate clausesor phrases.
(cid:2) Envirex Systems now employs 500 people. It was founded just
three years ago.
[The two ideas are equally important.]
(cid:2) Envirex Systems, which now employs 500 people, was founded
just three years ago.
[The number of employees is subordinated; the founding date is
emphasized.]
(cid:2) Envirex Systems, which was founded just three years ago, now
employs 500 people.
[The founding date is subordinated; the number of employees is
emphasized.]
Effective subordination can be used to achieve conciseness, emphasis,
and sentence variety. For example, consider the following sentences.
DEPENDENT CLAUSE The research report, which covered 86 pages,
was carefully documented.
PHRASE The research report, covering 86 pages, was
carefully documented.
SINGLE MODIFIER The 86-page research report was carefully doc-
umented.
Subordinating conjunctions(because, if, while, when, although) achieve
subordination effectively.
(cid:2) A buildup of deposits is impossible becausethe pipes are flushed
with water every day.
S
You may use a coordinating conjunction (and, but, for, nor, or, so, yet)
to concede that an opposite or balancing fact is true; however, a subor-
dinating conjunction can often make the point more smoothly.
(cid:2) Althoughtheir lab is well funded, ours is better equipped for DNA
testing.
The relationship between a conditional statement and a statement of
consequences is clearer if the condition is expressed as a subordinate
clause.

=== Page 550 ===
HTW_ch0S.qxp 8/22/08 8:55 AM Page 517
surveys 517
(cid:2) Becausethe tests were delayed, the surgery was postponed.
Relative pronouns (who, whom, which, that) can be used effectively to
combine related ideas within sentences.
(cid:2) The OnlinePro, whichprotects computers from malicious pro-
grams and e-mail attachments, makes your system “invisible”
to hackers.
Avoid overlapping subordinate constructions that depend on the
preceding construction. Overlapping can make the relationship between
a relative pronoun and its antecedent less clear.
OVERLAPPING Shock, whichoften accompanies severe injuries and
infections, is a failure of the circulation, whichis
marked by a fall in blood pressure thatinitially af-
fects the skin (whichexplains pallor) and later the
vital organs such as the kidneys and brain.
CLEAR Shock often accompanies severe injuries and infec-
tions. Marked by a fall in blood pressure, it is a
failure of the circulation, initially to the skin (thus
producing pallor) and later to the vital organs like
the kidneys and the brain.
suffixes
A suffix is a letter or letters added to the end of a word to change its
meaning in some way. Suffixes can change the part of speech of a word.
NO SUFFIX The proposal was thorough. [adjective]
SUFFIX The thoroughnessis obvious. [noun]
SUFFIX The proposal thoroughlydescribed the problem.
[adverb]
S
The suffix -like is sometimes added to nouns to make them into adjec-
tives. The resulting compound word is hyphenated only if it is unusual
or might not immediately be clear (childlike, lifelike, but dictionary-
like, Einstein-like).
surveys (see questionnaires)

=== Page 551 ===
HTW_ch0S.qxp 8/22/08 8:55 AM Page 518
518 synonyms
synonyms
A synonym is a word that means nearly the same thing as another word
does (seller, vendor, supplier). The dictionary definitions of synonyms
are similar, but the connotations may differ. For example, a seller may
be the same thing as a supplier, but the term supplierdoes not suggest a
retail transaction as strongly as sellerdoes.
Do not try to impress your readersby finding fancy or obscure syn-
onyms in a thesaurus; the result is likely to be affectation. See also con-
notation / denotationand antonyms.
syntax
Syntax refers to the way that words, phrases, and clauses are combined
to form sentences. In English, the most common structure is the subject-
verb-object pattern. For more information about the word order of sen-
tences, see sentence construction, sentence faults, sentence fragments,
and sentence variety.
S

=== Page 552 ===
6860ch0TU.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:56 AM Page 519
T
tables of contents
A table of contents is typically included in a document longer than ten
pages. It previews what the work contains and how it is organized, and
it allows readers looking for specific information to locate sections by
page number quickly and easily.
When creating a table of contents, use the major headingsand sub-
headings of your document exactly as they appear in the text, as shown
in the entry formal reports. (See the table of contents in Figure F–5 on
page 204.) The table of contents is placed in the front matter following
the title page and abstract, and precedes the list of tables or figures, the
foreword, and the preface.
tables
A table organizes data, such as statistics, into parallel rows and
columns that allow readers to make precise comparisons. Overall
trends, however, are more easily conveyed in graphsand other visuals.
Table Elements
Tables typically include the elements shown in Figure T–1.
Table Number. Table numbers should be placed above tables and as-
signed sequentially throughout the document.
T
Table Title. The title (or caption), which is normally placed just above
the table, should describe concisely what the table represents.
Box Head. The box head contains the column headings, which should
be brief but descriptive. Units of measurement should be either specified
as part of the heading or enclosed in parentheses beneath it. Standard
abbreviations and symbols are acceptable. Avoid vertical or diagonal
lettering.
519

=== Page 553 ===
6860ch0TU.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:56 AM Page 520
520 tables
Table Table 1. Estimated Emissions from Electric Power Table
number Generation (tons per gigawatthour) title
Parti- Volatile
Column
Box head Sulphur Nitrogen culate Carbon Organic
headings
Fuel Dioxide Oxides Matter Dioxide Compounds
Eastern coal 1.74 2.90 0.10 1,000 0.06 ⎫
Western coal 0.81 2.20 0.06 1,039 0.09 ⎪ ⎪
Gas 0.003 0.57 0.02 640 0.05 ⎪
Biomass 0.06 1.25 0.11 0* 0.61 ⎪
⎪
Stub Oil 0.51 0.63 0.02 840 0.03 ⎬Body
Wind 0 0 0 0 0 ⎪
Geothermal 0 0 0 0 0 ⎪
⎪
Hydro 0 0 0 0 0 ⎪
Solar 0 0 0 0 0 ⎪
⎭
Rule Nuclear 0 0 0 0 0
Footnote *Net emissions.
Source
line SOURCE: Department of Energy
Figure T–1. Elements of a Table
Stub. The stub, the left vertical column of a table, lists the items about
which information is given in the body of the table.
Body. The body comprises the data below the column headings and to
the right of the stub. Within the body, arrange columns so that the
items to be compared appear in adjacent rows and columns. Align the
numerical data in columns for ease of comparison, as shown in Figure
T–1. Where no information exists for a specific item, substitute a row
of dots or a dash to acknowledge the gap.
Rules. Rules are the lines (or borders) that separate the table into its
various parts. Tables should include top and bottom borders. Tables
often include right and left borders, although they may be open at the
sides, as shown in Figure T–1. Generally, include a horizontal rule be-
tween the column headings and the body of the table. Separate the
columns with vertical rules within a table only when they aid clarity.
Footnotes. Footnotes are used for explanations of individual items in
T the table. Symbols (such as * and †) or lowercase letters (sometimes in
parentheses) rather than numbers are ordinarily used to key table foot-
notes because numbers might be mistaken for numerical data or could
be confused with the numbering system for text footnotes. See also doc-
umenting sources.
Source Line. The source line identifies where the data originated.
When a source line is appropriate, it appears below the table. Many or-
ganizations place the source line below the footnotes. See also copyright
and plagiarism.

=== Page 554 ===
6860ch0TU.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:56 AM Page 521
technical writing style 521
Continuing Tables. When a table must be divided so that it can be
continued on another page, repeat the column headings and the table
number and title on the new page with a “continued” label (for ex-
ample, “Table 3. [title], continued”).
Informal Tables
To list relatively few items that would be easier for the reader to grasp
in tabular form, you can use an informal table, as long as you introduce
it properly. Although informal tables do not need titles or table num-
bers to identify them, they do require column headings that accurately
describe the information listed, as shown in Figure T–2.
The sound-intensity levels (decibels) for the three frequency bands (in hertz)
were determined to be the following:
Frequency Band (Hz) Decibels
600–1199 68
1200–2399 62
2400–4800 53
FIGURET–2. Informal Table
technical manuals (see manuals)
technical writing style
The goal of technical writing is to enable readersto use a technology or
understand a process or concept. Because the subject matter is more im-
portant than the writer’s voice, technical writing style uses an objective,
not a subjective, tone. The writing styleis direct and utilitarian, empha-
sizing exactness and clarityrather than elegance or allusiveness. A tech-
T
nical writer uses figurative language only when a figure of speechwould
facilitate understanding.
Technical writing is often—but not always—aimed at readers who
are not experts in the subject, such as consumers or employees learning to
operate unfamiliar equipment. Because such audiencesare inexperienced
and the procedures described may involve hazardous material or equip-
ment, clarity becomes an ethical as well as a stylistic concern. (See also
ethics in writing.) Figure T–3 is an excerpt from a technical manualthat
instructs eye-care specialists about operating testing equipment. As the

=== Page 555 ===
6860ch0TU.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:56 AM Page 522
522 telegraphic style
figure illustrates, visuals as well as layout and design enhance clarity,
providing the reader with both text and visual information.
Technical writing style may use a technical vocabulary appropriate
for the reader, as Figure T–3 shows (monocular electrode, saccade), but it
avoids affectation. Good technical writing also avoids overusing the pas-
sive voice. See also instructions, organization, and process explanation.
MONOCULAR RECORDING
Amonocular electrode configura-
tion might be useful to measure the
horizontal eye movement of each
eye separately. This configuration
is commonly used during the
voluntary saccade tests.
1. Place electrodes at the inner
canthi of both eyes (A and B,
Figure 51).
2. Place electrodes at the outer
canthi of both eyes (C and D).
3. Place the last electrode any-
where on the forehead (E).
4. Plug the electrodes into the jacks Figure 51
described in Figure 52 on the
following page.
With this configuration, the Channel Adisplay moves upward when the
patient’s left eye moves nasally and moves downward when the patient’s
left eye moves temporally. The Channel B display moves upward when
the patient’s right eye moves temporally and moves downward when the
patient’s right eye moves nasally.
NOTE:During all testing, the Nystar Plus identifies and eliminates
eye blinks without vertical electrode recordings.
FIGURET–3. Technical Writing Style
telegraphic style
T
Telegraphic style condenses writing by omitting articles, pronouns, con-
junctions, and transitions. Although concisenessis important, especially
in instructions, writers sometimes try to achieve conciseness by omit-
ting necessary words. Telegraphic style forces readers to supply the
missing words mentally, thus creating the potential for misunderstand-
ings. Compare the following two passages and notice how much easier
the revised version reads (the added words are italicized).

=== Page 556 ===
6860ch0TU.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:56 AM Page 523
tense 523
TELEGRAPHIC Take following action when treating serious burns.
Remove loose clothing on or near burn. Cover
injury with clean dressing and wash area around
burn. Secure dressing with tape. Separate fingers/
toes with gauze/cloth to prevent sticking. Do not
apply medication unless doctor prescribes.
CLEAR Take thefollowing action when treating aserious
burn. Remove anyloose clothing on or near the
burn. Cover the injury with aclean dressing and
wash thearea around the burn. Thensecure the
dressing with tape. Separate the fingers ortoes
with gauze orcloth to prevent themfrom sticking
together. Do not apply medication unless adoctor
prescribes it.
Telegraphic style can also produce ambiguity, as the following example
demonstrates.
AMBIGUOUS Grasp knob and adjust lever before raising boom.
[Does this sentence mean that the reader should
adjust the leveror also grasp an “adjust lever”?]
CLEAR Grasp theknob and adjust thelever before raising
the boom.
Although you may save yourself work by writing telegraphically, your
readers will have to work that much harder to decipher your meaning.
tenant / tenet
A tenantis one who holds or temporarily occupies a property owned by
another person. (“The tenant was upset by the rent increase.”) A tenet
is an opinion or principle held by a person, an organization, or a sys-
tem. (“Competition is a central tenetof capitalism.”)
T
tense
DIRECTORY
PastTense 524 Future Tense 525
PastPerfectTense 524 Future PerfectTense 525
PresentTense 525 Shiftin Tense 526
PresentPerfectTense 525

=== Page 557 ===
6860ch0TU.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:56 AM Page 524
524 tense
Tenseis the grammatical term for verbforms that indicate time distinc-
tions. The six tenses in English are past, past perfect, present, present
perfect, future, and future perfect. Each tense also has a corresponding
progressive form.
TENSE BASIC FORM PROGRESSIVE FORM
Past I began I was beginning
Pastperfect I had begun I had been beginning
Present I begin I am beginning
Presentperfect I have begun I have been beginning
Future I will begin I will be beginning
Future perfect I will have begun I will have been beginning
Perfect tenses allow you to express a prior action or condition that con-
tinues in a present, past, or future time.
PRESENT PERFECT Ihave begunto compile the survey results
and will continue for the rest of the month.
PAST PERFECT Ihad begunto read the manual when the
lights went out.
FUTURE PERFECT Iwill have begunthis project by the time
funds are allocated.
Progressive tenses allow you to describe some ongoing action or condi-
tion in the present, past, or future.
PRESENT PROGRESSIVE Iam beginning to be concerned that we will
not meet the deadline.
PAST PROGRESSIVE Iwas beginningto think we would not finish
by the deadline.
FUTURE PROGRESSIVE Iwill be requestinga leave of absence when
this project is finished.
PastTense
The simple past tense indicates that an action took place in its entirety
in the past. The past tense is usually formed by adding -d or -ed to the
T root form of the verb. (“We closedthe office early yesterday.”)
PastPerfectTense
The past perfect tense (also called pluperfect) indicates that one past
event preceded another. It is formed by combining the helping verb had
with the past-participle form of the main verb. (“He had finishedby the
time I arrived.”)

=== Page 558 ===
6860ch0TU.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:56 AM Page 525
tense 525
PresentTense
The simple present tense represents action occurring in the present,
without any indication of time duration. (“I ridethe train.”)
A general truth is always expressed in the present tense. (“Time
healsall wounds.”) The present tense can be used to present actions or
conditions that have no time restrictions. (“Water boils at 212 degrees
Fahrenheit.”) Similarly, the present tense can be used to indicate habit-
ual action. (“I passthe coffee shop every day.”) The present tense is also
used for the “historical present,” as in newspaper headlines (“FDA Ap-
provesNew Cancer Drug”) or as in references to an author’s opinion or
a work’s contents—even though it was written in the past.
(cid:2) In her 1979 article, Carolyn Miller arguesthat technical writing
possesses significant humanistic value.
PresentPerfectTense
The present perfect tense describes something from the recent past that
has a bearing on the present—a period of time before the present but
after the simple past. The present perfect tense is formed by combining
a form of the helping verb have with the past-participle form of the
main verb. (“We have finishedthe draft and can now revise it.”)
Future Tense
The simple future tense indicates a time that will occur after the pres-
ent. It uses the helping verb will (or shall) plus the main verb. (“I will
finishthe job tomorrow.”) Do not use the future tense needlessly; doing
so merely adds complexity.
is
(cid:2) This systemwill beexplained on page 3.
^
moves
(cid:2) When you press this button, the hoist will movethe plate into
^
position.
T
Future PerfectTense
The future perfect tense indicates action that will have been completed
at the time of or before another future action. It combines will haveand
the past participle of the main verb. (“She will have driven1,400 miles
by the time she returns.”)

=== Page 559 ===
6860ch0TU.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:56 AM Page 526
526 tense
Shiftin Tense
Be consistent in your use of tense. The only legitimate shift in tense
records a real change in time. Illogical shifts in tense will only confuse
your readers.
cleaned
(cid:2) Before he installed the circuit, the technician cleansthe
^
contacts.
ESL TIPSfor Using the Progressive Form
The progressive form of the verb is composed of two features:a form of
the helping verb beand the -ingform of the base verb.
PRESENT PROGRESSIVE I am updatingthe Web site.
PAST PROGRESSIVE I was updatingthe Web site last week.
FUTURE PROGRESSIVE I will be updatingthe Web site regularly.
The presentprogressive is used in three ways:
1. To refer to an action thatis in progress atthe momentof speaking
or writing:
(cid:2) The technician is repairingthe copier.
2. To highlightthata state or an action is notpermanent:
(cid:2) The office temp is helpingus for a few weeks.
3. To express future plans:
(cid:2) The summer intern is leavingto return to school this Friday.
The pastprogressive is used to refer to a continuing action or condition
in the past,usually with specified limits.
(cid:2) I was failingcalculus until I got a tutor.
The future progressive is used to refer to a continuous action or condi-
tion in the future.
(cid:2) We will be monitoringhis condition all night.
T
Verbs that express mental activity (believe, know, see, and so on) are
generally notused in the progressive.
believe
(cid:2) Iam believingthe defendant’s testimony.
^

=== Page 560 ===
6860ch0TU.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:56 AM Page 527
that/ which / who 527
test reports
The test report differs from the more formal laboratory report in both
size and scope. Considerably smaller, less formal, and more routine
than the laboratory report, the test report can be presented as a memo
or a letter, depending on whether its recipient is inside or outside the
organization. Either way, the reportshould have a subject line at the be-
ginning to identify the test being discussed. See also correspondence.
The opening of a test report should state the test’s purpose, unless
it is obvious from the subject line. The body of the report presents the
data and, if relevant, describes procedures used to conduct the test.
State the results of the test and, if necessary, interpret them. Conclude
the report, if appropriate, with any recommendations made as a result
of the test. Figure T–4 shows a report of tests required by a government
agency to monitor asbestos in the air at a highway construction site.
that / which / who
The word thatis often overused and can foster wordiness.
When I think
(cid:2) I think that whenthis project is finished, thatyou should publish
^ ^
the results.
However, include that in a sentence if it avoids ambiguity or improves
the pace. See also conciseness.
that
(cid:2) Some designers fail to appreciatethe workers who operate
^
equipment constitute an important safety system.
Use which, not that, with nonrestrictive clauses (clauses that do not
change the meaning of the basic sentence). See also restrictive and non-
restrictive elements.
T
NONRESTRICTIVE After John left the law firm, whichis the largest
in the region, he started a private practice.
RESTRICTIVE Companies thatdiversify usually succeed.
Thatand whichshould refer to animals and things; whoshould refer to
people. See also who / whom.

=== Page 561 ===
6860ch0TU.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:56 AM Page 528
528 testreports
Biospherics,Inc.
4928 Wyaconda Road Phone:301-598-9011
Rockville,MD 20852 Fax:301-598-9570
September 11, 2009
Safety Committee
The Angle Company, Inc.
1869 Slauson Boulevard
Waynesville, VA 23927
Subject: Monitoring Airborne Asbestos at the Route 66 Site
On August 28, Biospherics, Inc., performed asbestos-in-air monitoring
at your Route 66 construction site, near Front Royal, Virginia. Six people
and three construction areas were monitored.
All monitoring and analyses were performed in accordance with
“Occupational Exposure to Asbestos,” U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, Public Health Service, National Institute for Occu-
pational Safety and Health, 2008. Each worker or area was fitted with
a battery-powered personal sampler pump operating at a flow rate of
approximately two liters per minute. The airborne asbestos was collected
on a 37 mm Millipore-type AA filter mounted in an open-face filter holder.
Samples were collected over an 8-hour period.
In all cases, the workers and areas monitored were exposed to levels of
asbestos fibers well below the standard set by OSHA. The highest exposure
found was that of a driller exposed to 0.21 fibers per cubic centimeter. The
driller’s sample was analyzed by scanning electron microscopy followed
by energy-dispersive X-ray techniques that identify the chemical nature
of each fiber, to identify the fibers as asbestos or other fiber types. Results
from these analyses show that the fibers pres-ent were tremolite asbestos.
No nonasbestos fibers were found.
If you need more details, please let me know.
Yours truly,
Gary Geirelach
T
Chemist
gg2@Bios.org
FIGURET–4. TestReport

=== Page 562 ===
6860ch0TU.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:56 AM Page 529
titles 529
(cid:2) Dr. Cynthia Winter, whorecently joined the clinic, treated a dog
thatwas severely burned.
there / their / they’re
There is an expletive (a word that fills the position of another word,
phrase, or clause) or an adverb.
EXPLETIVE Therewere more than 1,500 people at the conference.
ADVERB More than 1,500 people were there.
Theiris the possessive caseform of they. (“Managers check theire-mail
regularly.”) They’reis a contractionof they are. (“Clients tell us they’re
pleased with our services.”)
thesaurus
A thesaurus is a book or an electronic file of words and their synonyms
and antonyms, arranged or retrievable by categories. Thoughtfully
used, a thesaurus can help you with word choice during the revision
phase of the writing process. However, the variety of words it offers
may tempt you to choose an inappropriate word for the context or to
use an obscure synonym. Use a thesaurus only to clarify or refine your
meaning, not to impress your readers. (See also affectation.) Never use
a word unless you are sure of its meanings; its connotations might be
unknown to you and could mislead your readers.
titles
Titles are important because many readers decide whether to read doc-
uments—such as reports, e-mails, memos, and newsletter articles—
based on their titles. This entry discusses both creating titles and refer-
T
ring to them in your writing. For advice on titles for figures and tables,
see visuals.
Reports and Long Documents
Titles for reports, proposals, articles, and similar documents should
state the document’s topic, reflect its tone, and indicate its scope and
purposeas in the following title of an academic article.

=== Page 563 ===
6860ch0TU.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:56 AM Page 530
530 titles
(cid:2) “Effects of 60-Hertz Electric Fields on Embryo Chick Develop-
ment, Growth, and Behavior”
Such titles should be concise but not so short that they are not specific.
For example, the title “Electric Fields and Living Organisms” an-
nounces the topic and might be appropriate for a book, but it does not
answer important questions that readers of an article would expect,
such as “What is the relationship between electric fields and living or-
ganisms?” and “What aspects of the organisms are related to electric
fields?”
Avoid titles with such redundancies as “Notes on,” “Studies on,”
or “A Report on.” However, works like annual reports or feasibility re-
ports should be identified as such in the title because this information
specifies the purpose and scope of the report. For titles of progress and
activity reports, indicate the dates in a subtitle (“Quarterly Report on
Hospital Admission Rates: January–March 2009”). Avoid using techni-
cal shorthand, such as chemical formulas, and other abbreviations in
your title unless the work is addressed exclusively to specialists in the
field. For multivolume publications, repeat the title on each volume and
include the subtitle and number of each volume.
Titles should not use the sentence form, except for titles of articles
in newslettersand magazines that ask a rhetorical question.
(cid:2) “Is Online Learning Right for You?”
Memos,E-mail,and InternetPostings
Subject lines of memos, e-mail messages, and Internet postings function
as titles and should concisely and accurately describe the topic of the
message. Because recipients often use subject-line titles to prioritize and
sort their correspondence, such titles must be specific.
VAGUE Subject: Tuition Reimbursement
SPECIFIC Subject: Tuition Reimbursement for Time-Management
Seminar
Although the title in the subject line announces your topic, you should
still provide an opening that provides contextfor the message.
T
Formatting Titles
Capitalization. Capitalize the initial letters of the first and last words
of a title as well as all major words in the title. Do not capitalize articles
(a, an, the), coordinating conjunctions (and, but), or short prepositions
(at, in, on, of) unless they begin or end the title (The Lives of a Cell).
Capitalize prepositions in titles if they contain five or more letters (Be-
tween, Since, Until, After).

=== Page 564 ===
6860ch0TU.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:56 AM Page 531
titles 531
Italics. Use italics or underlining when referring to titles of separately
published works, such as books, periodicals, newspapers, pamphlets,
brochures, legal cases, movies, television programs, and Web sites.
(cid:2) Turning Workplace Conflict into Collaboration[book] by Joyce
Richards was reviewed in the New York Times[newspaper].
(cid:2) We will include a link toThe Weather Channel(www.weather.com).
Abbreviations of such titles are italicized if their spelled-out forms
would be italicized.
(cid:2) NEJMfor the New England Journal of Medicine
Italicize the titles of compact and digital video discs, videotapes, plays,
long poems, paintings, sculptures, and long musical works.
CD-ROM Computer Security Tutorial(CD-ROM edition)
PLAY Arthur Miller’s Death of a Salesman
LONG POEM T. S. Eliot’s The Wasteland
PAINTING M. C. Escher’s Drawing Hands
SCULPTURE Auguste Rodin’s The Thinker
MUSICAL WORK Gershwin’s Porgy and Bess
Quotation Marks. Use quotation marks when referring to parts of
publications, such as chapters of books and articles or sections within
periodicals.
(cid:2) Her chapter titled “Effects of Government Regulations on Motor-
cycle Safety” in the book Government Regulation and the
Economywas cited in a recent article, “No-Fault Insurance and
Motorcycles,” published in American Motorcyclistmagazine.
Titles of reports, essays, short poems, short musical works (including
songs), short stories, and single episodes of radio and television pro-
grams are also enclosed in quotation marks.
T
REPORT “Analysis of Ethics Cases at CGF Corporation”
ESSAY Ralph Waldo Emerson’s “The American Scholar”
SHORT POEM Robert Frost’s “The Road Not Taken”
SONG Bob Dylan’s “Like a Rolling Stone”
SHORT STORY Nathaniel Hawthorne’s “The Birthmark”
TV PROGRAM “In Depth: Ray Kurzweil” on C-Span
[episode of In Depth]

=== Page 565 ===
6860ch0TU.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:56 AM Page 532
532 to / too / two
Special Cases. Some titles, by convention, are not set off by quotation
marks, underlining, or italics. Such titles follow standard practice for
capitalization and the practice of the organization.
(cid:2) Technical Writing [college course title], Old Testament, Magna
Carta, the Constitution, Lincoln’s Gettysburg Address, the Lands’
End Catalog
For citing titles in references and works cited, see documenting sources.
to / too / two
To, too, and two are frequently confused because they sound alike. To
is used as a prepositionor to mark an infinitive. See verbs.
(cid:2) Send the report tothe district manager. [preposition]
(cid:2) I do not wish toattend. [mark of the infinitive]
Toois an adverbmeaning “excessively” or “also.”
(cid:2) The price was toohigh. [excessively]
(cid:2) I, too, thought it was high. [also]
Twois a number(twobuildings, twoconcepts).
tone
Tone is the attitude a writer expresses toward the subject and his or her
readers. In workplace writing, tone may range widely—depending on
the purpose, situation, context, audience, and even the medium of a
communication. For example, in an e-mail message to be read only by
an associate who is also a friend, your tone might be casual.
(cid:2) Your proposal to Smith and Kline is super. We’ll just need to ham-
T mer out the schedule. If we get the contract, I owe you lunch!
In a memo to your manager or superior, however, your tone might be
more formal and respectful.
(cid:2) I think your proposal to Smith and Kline is excellent. I have
marked a couple of places where I’m concerned that we are com-
mitting ourselves to a schedule that we might not be able to keep.
If I can help in any other way, please let me know.

=== Page 566 ===
6860ch0TU.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:56 AM Page 533
trade journal articles 533
In a message that serves as a report to numerous readers, the tone
would be professional, without the more personal stylethat you would
use with an individual reader.
(cid:2) The Smith and Kline proposal appears complete and thorough,
based on our department’s evaluation. Several small revisions,
however, would ensure that the company is not committing itself
to an unrealistic schedule. These revisions are marked on the copy
of the report attached to this message.
The word choice, the introduction, and even the title contribute to the
overall tone of your document. For instance, a title such as “Ecological
Consequences of Diminishing Water Resources in California” clearly
sets a different tone from “What Happens When We’ve Drained Cali-
fornia Dry?” The first title would be appropriate for a report; the sec-
ond title would be more appropriate for a popular magazine or
newsletter article. See also correspondenceand technical writing style.
trade journal articles
DIRECTORY
Planning the Article 534 Conclusion 536
Gathering the Data 534 Visuals and Tables 536
Organizing the Draft 535 Headings 536
Preparing Sections of the Article 535 References 536
Abstract 535 Preparing the Manuscript 536
Introduction 535 Obtaining Publication Clearance 537
Trade journal articles are written for professional periodicals that aim
to further the knowledge in a field among specialists in that field. (See
audience.) Such periodicals, commonly known as trade journals (or
professional or scholarly journals), are often the official publications of
professional societies. Technical Communication, for example, is an of-
ficial voice of the Society for Technical Communication. Other profes-
sional publications include IEEE Transactions on Communications, T
Chemical Engineering, Nucleonics Week, and hundreds of others. Pro-
fessional staff people, such as engineers, scientists, educators, and legal
professionals, regularly contribute articles to trade journals.
Writing a trade journal article in your field can make your work
more widely known, provide publicity for your employer, give you a
sense of satisfaction, and even improve your chances for professional
advancement.

=== Page 567 ===
6860ch0TU.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:56 AM Page 534
534 trade journal articles
Planning the Article
When you are thinking about writing an article for a trade journal, con-
sider the following questions:
• Is your work or your knowledge of the subject original? If not,
what is there about your approach that justifies publication?
• Will the significance of the article justify the time and effort needed
to write it?
• What parts of your work, project, or study are most appropriate to
include in the article?
To help you answer those questions, learn as much as possible about
the periodical or periodicals to which you plan to submit an article and
consult your colleagues for advice. Once you have decided on several
journals, consider the following factors about each one:
• The professional interests and size of its readership
• The professional reputation of the journal
• The appropriateness of your article to the journal’s goals, as stated
on its masthead page or in a mission statement on its Web site
• The frequency with which its articles are cited in other journals
Next, read back issues of the journal or journals to find out information
such as the amount and kind of details that the articles include, the
length of the articles, and the typical writing style. (See also context.)
If your subject involves a particular project, begin work on your ar-
ticle when the project is in progress. That allows you to write the draft
in manageable increments and record the details of the project while
they are fresh in your mind. It also makes the writing integral to the
project and may even reveal any weaknesses in the design or details,
such as the need for more data.
As you plan your article, decide whether to invite one or more
coauthors to join you. Doing so can add strength and substance to an
article. However, as with all collaborative writing, you should establish
a schedule, assign tasks, and designate a primary author to ensure that
the finished article reads smoothly.
T
Gathering the Data
As you gather information, take notes from all the sources of primary
and secondary research available to you. Begin your research with a
careful review of the literature to establish what has been published
about your topic. A review of the relevant information in your field can
be insurance against writing an article that has already been published.
(Some articles, in fact, begin with a literature review.) As you compile

=== Page 568 ===
6860ch0TU.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:56 AM Page 535
trade journal articles 535
that information, record your references in full; include all the informa-
tion you need to document the source. See also documenting sources.
Organizing the Draft
Some trade journals use a prescribed organization for the major sec-
tions. The following organization is common in scientific journals: in-
troduction, materials and methods, results, discussion, and sources
cited. Look closely at several issues of the journals that you target to de-
termine how those or other sections are developed. If the major organi-
zation is not prescribed, choose and arrange the various sections of the
draft in a way that shows your results to best advantage.
The best guarantee of a logically organized article is a good out-
line. (See outlining.) If you have coauthors, work from a common, well-
developed outline to coordinate the various writers’ work and make
sure the parts fit together logically.
Preparing Sections of the Article
As you prepare an article, pay particular attention to a number of key
sections and elements: the abstract, the introduction, the conclusion, vi-
sualsand tables, headings, and references.
Abstract. Although it will appear at the beginning of the article, write
the abstract only after you have finished writing the body of the manu-
script. Follow any instructions provided by the journal on writing ab-
stracts and review those previously published in that journal. Prepare
your abstract carefully—it will be the basis on which other researchers
decide whether to read your article in full. Abstracts are often published
independently and are a source of terms (called keywords) used to
index, by subject, the original article for computerized information-
retrieval systems.
Introduction. The introduction should discuss these aspects of the ar-
ticle:
• The purposeof the article
• A definition of the problem examined
T
• The scopeof the article
• The rationale for your approach to the problem or project and the
reasons you rejected alternative approaches
• Previous work in the field, including other approaches described in
previously published articles
Above all, your introduction should emphasize what is new and differ-
ent about your approach, especially if you are not dealing with a new

=== Page 569 ===
6860ch0TU.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:56 AM Page 536
536 trade journal articles
concept. It should also demonstrate the overall significance of your proj-
ect or approach by explaining how it fills a need, solves a current prob-
lem, or offers a useful application.
Conclusion. The conclusion section pulls together your results and in-
terprets them in relation to the purpose of your study and the methods
used to conduct it. Your conclusion must grow out of the evidence for
the findings in the body of the article.
Visuals and Tables. Used effectively and appropriately, visuals can
clarify information and reinforce the point you are making in the ar-
ticle. Design each visual for a specific purpose: to describe a function, to
show an external appearance, to show internal construction, to display
statistical data, or to indicate trends.
Headings. Headings are important for an article because they break
the text into manageable portions. They also allow journal readers to
understand the development of your topic and pinpoint sections of par-
ticular interest to them. Check the use of headings when you review
back issues of the journal.
References. The references section (often titled “Works Cited”) of the
article lists the sources you used in the article. The specific format for
listing sources varies from field to field. Usually the journal to which
you submit an article will specify the form the editors require for citing
sources. For a detailed discussion of using and citing sources, see docu-
menting sourcesand quotations.
Preparing the Manuscript
Some trade journals recommend a particular style guide, such as The
Chicago Manual of Style, or offer a style sheet with detailed guidelines
on style and format. Such style sheets often include specific instructions
about how to format the manuscript, how many copies to submit, and
how to handle abbreviations, symbols, mathematical equations, and
the like. The following guidelines are typical.
T • Double-space the manuscript, leaving one-inch margins all around,
and number each page.
• Provide specific, accurate, and self-explanatory captions for all fig-
ures and tables. Add call-outs(labels) to those illustrations that
need them.
• Provide clear and accurately worded labels for drawings and other
illustrations.

=== Page 570 ===
6860ch0TU.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:56 AM Page 537
transition 537
• Place any mathematical or chemical equations on separate lines in
the text and number them consecutively.
• Check with the editor about the format, file type, or other special
requirements for photographsor scanned images.
Obtaining Publication Clearance
After you have finalized your article, submit a copy to your employer
for review before sending it to the journal. A review will ensure that
you have not inadvertently revealed any proprietary information. Like-
wise, secure permission ahead of time to print information for which
someone else holds the copyright. See also plagiarism.
transition
Transition is the means of achieving a smooth flow of ideas from sen-
tence to sentence, paragraphto paragraph, and subject to subject. Tran-
sition is a two-way indicator of what has been said and what will be
said; it provides readerswith guideposts for linking ideas and clarifying
the relationship between them.
Transition can be obvious.
(cid:2) Having consideredthe technical problems outlined in this pro-
posal, we move nextto the question of adequate staffing.
Transition can be subtle.
(cid:2) Even iftechnical problems could be solved, there still remainsthe
problem of adequate staffing.
Either way, you now have your readers’ attention fastened on the prob-
lem of adequate staffing, exactly what you set out to do.
Methods of Transition
T
Transition can be achieved in many ways: (1) using transitional words
and phrases, (2) repeating keywords or key ideas, (3) using pronouns
with clear antecedents, (4) using enumeration (1, 2, 3, or first, second,
third), (5) summarizing a previous paragraph, (6) asking a question,
and (7) using a transitional paragraph.
Certain words and phrases are inherently transitional. Consider the
following terms and their functions:

=== Page 571 ===
6860ch0TU.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:56 AM Page 538
538 transition
FUNCTION TERMS
Result therefore,as a result,consequently,thus,hence
Example for example, for instance, specifically, as an illustration
Comparison similarly,likewise,in comparison
Contrast but,yet,still,however,nevertheless,on the other hand
Addition moreover,furthermore,also,too,besides,in addition
Time now,later,meanwhile,since then,after that,before
thattime
Sequence first,second,third,initially,then,next,finally
Within a paragraph, such transitional expressions clarify and smooth
the movement from idea to idea. Conversely, the lack of transitional de-
vices can make for disjointed reading. See also telegraphic style.
Transition Between Sentences
You can achieve effective transition between sentences by repeating key-
words or key ideas from preceding sentences and by using pronouns
that refer to antecedents in previous sentences. Consider the following
short paragraph, which uses both of those means.
(cid:2) Representative of many American university towns is Middletown.
This midwestern town, formerly a sleepy farming community, is
today the home of a large and vibrant academic community. At-
tracting students from all over the Midwest, this university town
has grown very rapidly in the last ten years.
Enumeration is another device for achieving transition.
(cid:2) The recommendation rests on two conditions. First, the depart-
ment staff must be expanded to handle the increased workload.
Second, sufficient time must be provided for training the new staff.
Transition Between Paragraphs
The means discussed so far for achieving transition between sentences
can also be effective for achieving transition between paragraphs. For
paragraphs, however, longer transitional elements are often required.
One technique is to use an opening sentence that summarizes the pre-
T
ceding paragraph and then moves on to a new paragraph.
(cid:2) One property of material considered for manufacturing processes
is hardness. Hardness is the internal resistance of the material to
the forcing apart or closing together of its molecules. Another
property is ductility, the characteristic of material that permits it to
be drawn into a wire. Material also may possess malleability, the
property that makes it capable of being rolled or hammered into

=== Page 572 ===
6860ch0TU.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:56 AM Page 539
trip reports 539
thin sheets of various shapes. Purchasing managers must consider
these properties before selecting manufacturing materials for use in
production.
The requirements of hardness, ductility, and malleabilityac-
count for the high cost of such materials....
Another technique is to ask a question at the end of one paragraph and
answer it at the beginning of the next.
(cid:2) New technology has always been feared because it has at times dis-
placed some jobs. However, it invariably creates many more jobs
than it eliminates. Almost always, the jobs eliminated by techno-
logical advances have been menial, unskilled jobs, and workers
who have been displaced have been forced to increase their skills,
which resulted in better and higher-paying jobs for them. In view
of these facts, is new technology really bad?
Certainly technology has given us unparalleled access to infor-
mation and created many new roles for employees....
A purely transitional paragraph may be inserted to aid readability.
(cid:2) The problem of poor management was a key factor that caused the
weak performance of the company.
Two other setbacks to the company’s fortunes also marked the
company’s decline: the loss of many skilled workers through the
early retirement program and the intensification of the rate of em-
ployee turnover.
The early retirement program resulted in engineering staff...
If you provide logical organization and have prepared an outline, your
transitional needs will easily be satisfied and your writing will have
unity and coherence. During revision, look for places where transition
is missing and add it. Look for places where it is weak and strengthen it.
trip reports
A trip report provides a permanent record of a business trip and its ac- T
complishments. It provides managers with essential information about
the results of the trip and can enable other staff members to benefit
from the information. See also reports.
A trip report is normally written as a memo or an e-mail and ad-
dressed to an immediate superior, as shown in Figure T–5. The subject
line identifies the destination and dates of the trip. The body of the re-
port explains why you made the trip, whom you visited, and what you

=== Page 573 ===
6860ch0TU.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:56 AM Page 540
540 trip reports
From: James D.Kerson <jdkerson@psys.com>
To: Roberto Camacho <rcamacho@psys.com>
Sent: Wed,14 Jan 2009 12:16:30 EST
Subject: Trip to Smith Electric Co.,Huntington,WestVirginia,
January 5–6,2009
Attachments: Expense Report.xls (25 KB)
I visited the Smith Electric Company in Huntington,WestVirginia,to
determine the cause of a recurring failure in a Model 247 printer and
to fix it.
Problem
The printer stopped printing periodically for no apparentreason.Re-
peated efforts to bring itback online eventually succeeded,butthe
problem recurred atirregular intervals.Neither customer personnel
operating the printer nor the local maintenance specialistwas able
to solve the problem.
Action
On January 5,I metwith Ms.Ruth Bernardi,the Office Manager,who
explained the problem.My troubleshooting did notreveal the cause
of the problem then or on January 6.
Only when I tested the logic cable did I find thatitcontained a
broken wire.I replaced the logic cable and then ran all the normal
printer testpatterns to make sure no other problems existed.All pat-
terns were positive,so I turned the printer over to the customer.
Conclusion
There are over 12,000 of these printers in the field,and to my knowl-
edge this is the firstoccurrence of a bad cable.Therefore,I do not
believe the logic cable problem found atSmith Electric Company
warrants further investigation.
=================================
James D.Kerson,Maintenance Specialist
Printer Systems,Inc.
1366 Federal St.,Allentown,PA 18101
(610) 747-9955 Fax:(610) 747-9956
jdkerson@psys.com
www.psys.com
=================================
FIGURET–5. Trip ReportSentas E-mail (with Attachment)
T
accomplished. The report should devote a brief section to each major
activity and may include a heading for each section. You need not give
equal space to each activity—instead, elaborate on the more important
ones. Follow the body of the report with the appropriate conclusions
and recommendations. Finally, if required, attach a record of expenses
to the trip report.

=== Page 574 ===
6860ch0TU.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:56 AM Page 541
trouble reports 541
trouble reports
The trouble report is used to analyze such events as accidents, equip-
ment failures, or health emergencies. For example, the report shown in
Figure T–6 describes an accident involving personal injury. The report
assesses the causes of the problem and suggests changes necessary to
prevent its recurrence. Because it is usually an internal document, the
trouble report normally follows the memoformat. See also reports.
In the subject line of the memo, state the precise problem you are
reporting. Then, in the body of the report, provide a detailed, precise
description of the problem. What happened? Where and when did the
problem occur? Was anybody hurt? Was there any property damage?
Was there a work stoppage?
Consolidated Energy, Inc.
To: Marvin Lundquist, Vice President
Administrative Services
KK
From: Kalo Katarlan, Safety Officer
Field Service Operations
Date: August 19, 2009
Subject: Field Service Employee Accident on August 5, 2009
The following is an initial report of an accident that occurred on Wed-
nesday, August 5, 2009, involving John Markley, and that resulted
in two days of lost time.
Accident Summary
John Markley stopped by a rewiring job on German Road. Chico Ruiz
was working there, stringing new wire, and John was checking with
Chico about the materials he wanted for framing a pole. Some tree trim-
ming had been done in the area, and John offered to help remove some
of the debris by loading it into the pickup truck he was driving. While
John was loading branches into the bed of the truck, a piece broke off in
his right hand and struck his right eye.
Accident Details
T
1. John’s right eye was struck by a piece of tree branch. John had just
undergone laser surgery on his right eye on Monday, August 3, to
reattach his retina.
2. John immediately covered his right eye with his hand, and Chico
Ruiz gave him a paper towel with ice to cover his eye and help ease
the pain.
FIGURE T–6. Trouble Report(Using Printed Memo)

=== Page 575 ===
6860ch0TU.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:56 AM Page 542
542 try to
7. On Thursday, August 6, John returned to his eye surgeon. Although
bruised, his eye was not damaged, and the surgically reattached
retina was still in place.
Recommendations
To prevent a recurrence of such an accident, the Safety Department will
require the following actions in the future:
• When working around and moving debris such as tree limbs or
branches, all service crew employees must wear safety eyewear
with side shields.
• All service crew employees must always consider the possibility of
shock for an injured employee. If crew members cannot leave the
job site to care for the injured employee, someone on the crew must
call for assistance from the Service Center. The Service Center
phone number is printed in each service crew member’s handbook.
FIGURE T–6. Trouble Report(Using Printed Memo) (continued)
ETHICS NOTE Because insurance claims, workers’-compensation awards,
and even lawsuits may hinge on the information contained in a trouble
report, be sure to include precise times, dates, locations, treatment of
injuries, names of any witnesses, and any other crucial information.
(Notice the careful use of language and factual detail in Figure T–6.) Be
thorough and accurate in your analysis of the problem and support any
judgments or conclusions with facts. Be objective: Always use a neutral
toneand avoid assigning blame. If you speculate about the cause of the
problem, make it clear to your readers that you are speculating. See
also ethics in writing. ✦
In your conclusion, state what has been or will be done to correct
the conditions that led to the problem. That may include, for example,
recommendations for training in safety practices, improved equipment,
and protective clothing.
T try to
The phrase try and is colloquial for try to. For technical writing, use
try to.
to
(cid:2) Please try andfinish the report by next week.
^

=== Page 576 ===
6860ch0TU.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:56 AM Page 543
U
unity
Unity is singleness of purpose and focus; a unified paragraph or docu-
ment has a central idea and does not digress into unrelated topics.
The logical sequence provided through outlining is essential to
achieving unity. An outline enables you to lay out the most direct route
from introduction to conclusion, and it enables you to build each para-
graph around a topic sentence that expresses a single idea.
Effective transition helps build unity, as well as coherence, because
transitional terms clarify the relationship of each part to what precedes it.
up
Adding the word upto verbsoften creates a redundant phrase. See also
conciseness.
(cid:2) You must open upthe exhaust valve.
usability testing
Usability refers to whether readers can use a document or Web site to
easily fulfill their goals or accomplish tasks. For example, the usability
of a technical manualmight refer to the ability of readers to perform a
procedure accurately and smoothly with the aid of the instructions.*
The usability of a retail Web site might refer to the ability of visitors to
understand the contents quickly and navigate the site easily to order a
product.
U
Usability testing helps produce a document that reduces the learn-
ing curve, allows more functionality with less effort, and increases pro-
ductivity. At the same time, by focusing development on users, companies
*Usability engineering, or user-centered design (UCD), refers to the process of devel-
oping products and systems with the user’s needs in mind so that ideally usability is
built into both products and their documentation from the beginning.
543

=== Page 577 ===
6860ch0TU.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:56 AM Page 544
544 usability testing
also reap benefits in reduced costs and increased customer satisfaction
in the following ways:
• Usable documents can enhance the organization’s reputation.
• The documents are functional and more likely to be used.
• Product and document changes can be made before they become
expensive.
• Efficient document development and training are facilitated.
• The need for updates and maintenance releases is minimized.
Usability testing is a common way to involve users in the develop-
ment process—for example, by testing periodic drafts on users and
then revising the document in response to the test results. The process
typically begins with the establishment of specific, quantitative, and
measurable goals for documents. Next, the documents are designed to
fulfill those goals. Finally, tests must be conducted with representative
users to detect problems and determine whether the established goals
have been achieved.
Usability testing involves teams of skilled usability specialists, inter-
face designers, and technical writers. Usability testing has three main
goals:
• To create a document that is easy to use and allows users to ac-
complish the tasks outlined in that document
• To detect potential problems for users as well as to guide designers
in resolving such issues, minimizing the risk of releasing ineffective
documents
• To enable companies to avoid repeating mistakes when developing
future documents
Test participants typically are members of the target audience for
the document. If the participants encounter problems with the docu-
ment, it is likely that actual users will experience similar problems. For
example, if page 15 of a tax form is unclear to test participants, it is
likely to be confusing to most taxpayers.
Usability tests can include one or more of the following methods.
• User testing.Testers observe and record the actions of test partici-
pants who perform real tasks using the document.
U
• Protocols.Test participants make comments aloud as they read
documents and perform document tasks, to reveal their thought
processes, attitudes, and reasons for decision-making.
• Comprehension tests.Users complete tests to determine whether
they understand and can recall document features, such as visuals
or tables.

=== Page 578 ===
6860ch0TU.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:56 AM Page 545
utilize 545
• Surveys and interviews.Testers interview users both before and
after they read documents to determine their comprehension and
attitudes and the clarityof the documents.
Analyzing the results of those test methods can help document design-
ers detect problems and determine whether the document’s purposes
have been met. If test participants have trouble navigating a document
or quickly locating specific items, for example, the organization as well
as layoutand designare revised. See also forms design, interviewing for
information, and questionnaires.
usage
Usage describes the choices we make among the various words and ex-
pressions available in our language. The lines between standard English
and nonstandard English and between formal and informal English are
determined by those choices. Your guideline in any situation requiring
such choices should be appropriateness: Is the word or expression you
use appropriate to your audienceand your subject? When it is, you are
practicing good usage.
This book contains many entries that focus on various usages. For
a complete list of the usage entries, which appear in italics throughout
the book, see “Commonly Misused Words and Phrases” on pages
627–28. An up-to-date dictionaryis also an invaluable aid in your selec-
tion of the right word.
WEB LINK Online Usage and Style Guides
Bartleby.com provides classic reference books online,including the
American Heritage Book of English Usage.For this and additional useful
links,see bedfordstmartins.com/alredtechand selectLinks for Hand-
book Entries.
utilize
U
Do not use utilizeas a long variant of use, which is the general word for
“employ for some purpose.” Usewill almost always be clearer and less
pretentious. See affectation.

=== Page 579 ===
6860ch0V.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:57 AM Page 546
V
vague words
A vague word is one that is imprecise in the context in which it is used.
Some words encompass such a broad range of meanings that there is no
focus for their definition. Words such as real, nice, important, good,
bad, contact, thing, and fineare often called “omnibuswords” because
they can have so many meanings and interpretations. In speech, our
vocal inflections help make the meanings of such words clear. Because
you cannot rely on vocal inflections when you are writing, avoid using
vague words. Be concrete and specific. See also abstract/ concrete words
and word choice.
VAGUE It was a productivemeeting. [Why was it productive?]
SPECIFIC The meeting resolved three questions: pay scales, fringe
benefits, and workloads.
verbals
Verbals are derived from verbsbut function as nouns, adjectives, and ad-
verbs. The three types of verbals are gerunds, infinitives, and participles.
Gerunds
A gerund is a verbal ending in -ingthat is used as a noun. A gerund can
be used as a subject, a direct object, the object of a preposition, a sub-
jective complement, or an appositive.
(cid:2) Drawingis an important engineering skill. [subject]
(cid:2) I find drawinginteresting. [direct object]
(cid:2) We were unprepared for their coming. [object of preposition]
V
(cid:2) Seeing is believing. [subjective complement]
(cid:2) My primary departmental function, programming, occupies about
two-thirds of my time on the job. [appositive]
546

=== Page 580 ===
6860ch0V.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:57 AM Page 547
verbals 547
Only the possessive form of a noun or pronounshould precede a gerund.
(cid:2) John’sworking has not affected his grades.
(cid:2) Hisworking has not affected his grades.
Infinitives
An infinitive is the bare, or uninflected, form of a verb (for example, go,
run, fall, talk, dress, shout) without the restrictions imposed by person
and number. Along with the gerund and the participle, it is one of the
nonfinite verb forms. The infinitive is generally preceded by the word
to, which, although not an inherent part of the infinitive, is considered
to be the sign of an infinitive. An infinitive is a verbal and can function
as a noun, an adjective, or an adverb.
(cid:2) To expandis not the only objective. [noun]
(cid:2) These are the instructions to follow. [adjective]
(cid:2) The company struggled to survive. [adverb]
The infinitive can reflect two tenses: the present and (with a help-
ing verb) the present perfect.
(cid:2) to go [present tense]
(cid:2) to have gone [present perfect tense]
The most common mistake made with infinitives is using the present
perfect tense when the simple present tense is sufficient.
go
(cid:2) I should not have tried to have goneso early.
^
Infinitives formed with the root form of transitive verbs can express
both active and (with a helping verb) passive voice.
(cid:2) to hit [present tense, active voice]
(cid:2) to have hit [present perfect tense, active voice]
(cid:2) to be hit [present tense, passive voice]
(cid:2) to have been hit [present perfect tense, passive voice]
A split infinitive is one in which an adverb is placed between the
sign of the infinitive, to, and the infinitive itself. Because they make up a
grammatical unit, the infinitive and its sign are better left intact than V
separated by an intervening adverb.
(cid:2) To initiallybuild a client base, experts recommend networking
with friends and family.

=== Page 581 ===
6860ch0V.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:57 AM Page 548
548 verbals
However, it may occasionally be better to split an infinitive than to
allow a sentence to become awkward, ambiguous, or incoherent.
AMBIGUOUS She agreed immediately to deliverthe specimen to
the lab.
[This sentence could be interpreted to mean that she
agreed immediately.]
CLEAR She agreed toimmediately deliverthe specimen to
the lab.
[This sentence is no longer ambiguous.]
Participles
A participle is a verb form that functions as an adjective. Present par-
ticiples end in -ing.
(cid:2) Increasingcosts forced us to reduce our staff.
Past participles end in -ed, -t, -en, -n, or -d.
(cid:2) What are the estimatedcosts?
(cid:2) Repair the bentlever.
(cid:2) Return the brokenpart.
(cid:2) What are the metal’s knownproperties?
(cid:2) The story, toldmany times before, was still interesting.
The perfect participle is formed with the present participle of the help-
ing verb haveplus the past participle of the main verb.
(cid:2) Having gotten[perfect participle] a large bonus, the smiling
[present participle], contented[past participle] technician worked
harder than ever.
A participle cannot be used as the verb of a sentence. Inexperienced
writers sometimes make that mistake, and the result is a sentence frag-
ment.
, his
(cid:2) The committee chairperson was responsible. Hisvote being the
^
decisive one.
was
V (cid:2) The committee chairperson was responsible. His vote beingthe
^
decisive one.
For information on participial and infinitive phrases, see phrases.

=== Page 582 ===
6860ch0V.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:57 AM Page 549
verbs 549
verbs
DIRECTORY
Types of Verbs 549
Forms of Verbs 550
Finite Verbs 550
Nonfinite Verbs 550
Properties of Verbs 550
A verb is a word or group of words that describes an action (“The
copier jammed at the beginning of the job”), states how something or
someone is affected by an action (“He was disappointed that the pro-
posal was rejected”), or affirms a state of existence (“She is a district
manager now”).
Types of Verbs
Verbs are either transitive or intransitive. A transitive verbrequires a di-
rect objectto complete its meaning.
(cid:2) They laidthe foundation on October 24.
[Foundationis the direct object of the transitive verb laid.]
(cid:2) Rosalie Anderson wrotethe treasurer a letter.
[Letteris the direct object of the transitive verb wrote.]
An intransitive verbdoes not require an object to complete its meaning.
It makes a full assertion about the subject without assistance (although
it may have modifiers).
(cid:2) The engine ran.
(cid:2) The engine ransmoothly and quietly.
A linking verb is an intransitive verb that links a complement to the
subject.
(cid:2) The carpet isstained.
[Isis a linking verb; stainedis a subjective complement.]
Some intransitive verbs, such as be, become, seem, and appear, are al-
most always linking verbs. A number of others, such as look, sound,
taste, smell, and feel, can function as either linking verbs or simple in- V
transitive verbs. If you are unsure about whether one of those verbs is a
linking verb, try substituting seem; if the sentence still makes sense, the
verb is probably a linking verb.

=== Page 583 ===
6860ch0V.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:57 AM Page 550
550 verbs
(cid:2) Their antennae feeldelicate.
[Seemcan be substituted for feel—thus feelis a linking verb.]
(cid:2) Their antennae feeldelicately for their prey.
[Seemcannot be substituted for feel; in this case, feelis a simple in-
transitive verb.]
Forms of Verbs
Verbs are described as being either finite or nonfinite.
Finite Verbs. A finite verb is the main verb of a clause or sentence. It
makes an assertion about its subject and often serves as the only verb in
its clause or sentence. (“The telephone rang, and the receptionist an-
sweredit.”) See also sentence construction.
A helping verb (sometimes called an auxiliary verb) is used in a
verb phrase to help indicate mood, tense, and voice. (“The phone had
rung.”) Phrases that function as helping verbs are often made up of com-
binations with the sign of the infinitive, to(for example, am going to, is
about to, has to, and ought to). The helping verb always precedes the
main verb, although other words may intervene. (“Machines willnever
completely replacepeople.”)
Nonfinite Verbs. Nonfinite verbs are verbals—verb forms that func-
tion as nouns, adjectives, or adverbs.
A gerund is a noun that is derived from the -ing form of a verb.
(“Seeingis believing.”) An infinitive, which uses the root form of a verb
(usually preceded by to), can function as a noun, an adverb, or an ad-
jective.
(cid:2) He hates to complain. [noun, direct object of hates]
(cid:2) The valve closes to stopthe flow. [adverb, modifies closes]
(cid:2) This is the proposal to consider. [adjective, modifies proposal]
A participleis a verb form that can function as an adjective.
(cid:2) The rejectedproposal may be resubmitted when the concerns are
addressed.
[Rejectedis a verb form that is used as an adjective modifying
proposal.]
Properties of Verbs
V
Verbs must (1) agree in person with personal pronouns functioning as
subjects, (2) agree in tense and numberwith their subjects, and (3) be in
the appropriate voice.

=== Page 584 ===
6860ch0V.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:57 AM Page 551
verbs 551
ESL TIPSfor Avoiding Shifts in Voice,Mood,or Tense
To achieve clarity in your writing,you mustmaintain consistency and
avoid shifts.A shift is an abrupt change in voice,mood,or tense.Pay
special attention when you edityour writing to check for the following
types of shifts.
VOICE
he does not permit
(cid:2) The captain permits his crew to go ashore, but they are not
them ^
permittedto go downtown.
^
[The entire sentence is now in the active voice.]
MOOD
(cid:2) Reboot your computer/, and you shouldempty the cache.
[The entire sentence is now in the imperative mood.]
TENSE
fell
(cid:2) I was working quickly, and suddenly a box fallsoff the conveyor
broke ^
belt and breaksmy foot.
^
[The entire sentence is now in the past tense.]
Person is the term for the form of a personal pronoun that indi-
cates whether the pronoun refers to the speaker, the person spoken to,
or the person (or thing) spoken about. Verbs change their forms to
agree in person with their subjects.
(cid:2) I see[first person] a yellow tint, but she sees[third person] a
yellow-green hue.
Tense refers to verb forms that indicate time distinctions. The six
tenses are past, past perfect, present, present perfect, future, and future
perfect.
Numberrefers to the two forms of a verb that indicate whether the
subject of a verb is singular (“The copier wasrepaired”) or plural (“The
copiers wererepaired”).
Most verbs show the singular of the present tense by adding -s or
-es (he stands, she works, it goes), and they show the plural without -s V
or -es (they stand, we work, they go). The verb to be, however, nor-
mally changes form to indicate the singular (“I am ready”) or plural
(“We areready”).

=== Page 585 ===
6860ch0V.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:57 AM Page 552
552 very
Voice refers to the two forms of a verb that indicate whether the
subject of the verb acts or receives the action. The verb is in the active
voiceif the subject of the verb acts (“The bacteria grow”); the verb is in
the passive voice if it receives the action (“The bacteria are grown in a
petri dish”).
WEB LINK Conjugation of Verbs
The conjugation of a verb arranges all forms of the verb so thatthe
differences caused by the changing of the tense,number,person,and
voice are readily apparent.For a chartshowing the full conjugation of
the verb drive,see bedfordstmartins.com/alredtechand selectLinks for
Handbook Entries.
very
The use of intensifierslike veryis tempting, but the word can usually be
deleted.
(cid:2) The board was veryworried about a possible product recall.
When you do use intensifiers, clarify their meaning.
(cid:2) The patient’s resting heart rate was veryfast; it was measured at
180 beats per minute.
via
Via is Latin for “by way of.” The term should be used only in routing
instructions.
(cid:2) The package was shipped viaFedEx.
as a result of
(cid:2) Her project was funded viathe recent legislation.
^
visuals
V
Visuals can express ideas or convey information in ways that words
alone cannot by making abstract concepts and relationships concrete.
Visuals can show how things look (drawings, photographs, maps), rep-

=== Page 586 ===
6860ch0V.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:57 AM Page 553
visuals 553
resent numbers and quantities (graphs, tables), depict processes or rela-
tionships (flowcharts, schematic diagrams), and show hierarchical rela-
tionships (organizational charts). They also highlight important infor-
mation and emphasize key concepts succinctly and clearly.
Many of the qualities of good writing—simplicity, clarity, concise-
ness, directness—are equally important when creating and using visu-
als. Presented with clarity and consistency, visuals can help readers
focus on key portions of your document, presentation, or Web site. Be
aware, though, that even the best visual will not be effective without
context—and most often context is provided by the text that intro-
duces the visual and clarifies its purpose
The following entries in this book are related to specific visuals and
their use in printed and online documents, as well as in presentations
(see that entry for presentation graphics).
drawings 154 maps 319
flowcharts 192 organizational charts 362
formal reports 195 photographs 377
global graphics 230 tables 519
graphs 235 Web design 561
layoutand design 295 writing for the Web 570
Selecting Visuals
Consider your audienceand your purposecarefully in selecting visuals.
You would need different illustrations for an automobile owner’s man-
ual or an auto dealer’s Web site, for example, than you would for a me-
chanic’s diagnostic guide. Figure V–1 can help you select the most
appropriate visuals, based on their purposes and special features. Jot
down visual options when you are considering your scope and organi-
zation.
ETHICS NOTE Be aware that visuals have the potential of misleading
readers when data are selectively omitted or distorted. For example,
Figure G–6 shows a graph that gives a misleading impression of lab-test
failures because the scale is compressed, with some of the years selec-
tively omitted. Visuals that mislead readers call the credibility of you
and your organization into question at the least—and they are unethi-
cal. The use of misleading visuals can even subject you and your organi-
zation to lawsuits. ✦
Integrating Visuals with Text V
Consider the best locations for visuals before you begin writing a draft.
Your goal should be to use visuals where they will best advance your
purpose, aid your readers, and integrate smoothly within your text.

=== Page 587 ===
6860ch0V.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:57 AM Page 554
554 visuals
CHOOSING APPROPRIATE VISUALS
TO SHOW OBJECTS AND SPATIAL RELATIONSHIPS
DRAWINGS CAN... • Depict real objects difficult to photograph
• Depict imaginary objects
• Highlight only parts viewers need to see
• Show internal parts of equipment in cutaway
views
• Show how equipment parts fit together in
exploded views
PHOTOGRAPHS CAN... • Show actual physical images of subjects
• Record an event in process
• Record the development of phenomena over
time
• Record the as-found condition of a situation
for an investigation
TO DISPLAY GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION
MAPS CAN... • Show specific geographic features of an area
• Show distance, routes, or locations of sites
• Show the geographic distribution of informa-
tion (e.g., populations by region)
TO SHOW NUMERICAL AND OTHER RELATIONSHIPS
TABLES CAN... • Organize information systematically in rows
Divisions Employees and columns
Research 1,052
Marketing 2,782 • Present large numerical quantities concisely
Automotive 13,251
Consumer Products 2,227 • Facilitate item-to-item comparisons
• Clarify trends and other graphical informa-
tion with precise data
BAR & COLUMN • Depict data in vertical or horizontal bars and
GRAPHS CAN... columns for comparison
Max Jennings • Show quantities that make up a whole
April Marks
Larry McCoy • Visually represent data shown in tables
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140
Number of Calls
Number of Closings
V FIGURE V–1. Chartfor Choosing Appropriate Visuals (continued on nextpage)

=== Page 588 ===
visuals 555
LINE GRAPHS CAN... • Show trends over time in amounts, sizes,
80 rates, and other measurements
70 60 • Give an at-a-glance impression of trends,
5 4 0 0 forecasts, and extrapolations of data
30 20 • Compare more than one kind of data over
10 the same time period
0 21001234210022342100323421004234
Sales of Models 10.A33 and 12.C19, 2001–2004 (quarterly) • Visually represent data shown in tables
PICTURE GRAPHS CAN... • Use recognizable images to represent specific
Staff Travel Frequency, 2005 quantities
1–2 a t i y m e e a s r 7% • Help nonexpert readers grasp the information
3–6 a t i y m e e a s r 25%
7–12 a t i y m e e a s r 21% • Visually represent data shown in tables
PIE GRAPHS CAN... • Show quantities that make up a whole
SewMagisec*ellaneous* • Give an immediate visual impression of the
TCroalslehction*
10%
5%5%
parts and their significance
SMtareinettenance* 10% 45% Salaries • Visually represent data shown in tables or
25% lists
PPorolitceec taionnd* Fire
*ThesYeo fuigr uMreusn dicoi pnaolt Tinacxlu Ddoel lsaarlaries.
TO SHOW STEPS IN A PROCESS OR RELATIONSHIPS IN A SYSTEM
FLOWCHARTS CAN... • Show how the parts or steps in a process or
system interact
• Show the stages of an actual or a hypothetical
process in the correct direction, including
recursive steps
TO SHOW RELATIONSHIPS IN A HIERARCHY
ORGANIZATIONAL • Give an overview of an organization’s
CHARTS CAN... departmental components
DEPARTM CFE EON NOT TDE O R O A F F NF FODH ICR ED E V AR EO UL T T F GE H R AR E DA INS MN AE ID RN AY R ISH CMTU H RE MADTA ICION INN S E ERVICES • Show how the components relate to one
another
L O in M F d a a F rD I l D e C Ee . E PY n UoDO W uT IFRn eY g TE k mD H e C lI E a l T R, n O ME D , R C I M . R ST. . E S ,O C . PR, T h P O . h D R . . D (DB . VE) • Depict lines of authority within an
DRIEVSISIDIOUNE OCHFEMISTRY DAINVIIMSAIOLN R OEFSEARCH DAINVIIMSAIOLN A ONFD FOOD MICROBIOLOGY organization
DMIiRchEaCeTl OH.R Thomas(DBVEA) DRIuRsEseCl TAO. RFrobish, P(DhB.VDE.B) DRIoRbEeCrt TDO. WRalker, M.S., Ph.D. (DBVEC)
TO SUPPLEMENT OR REPLACE WORDS
SYMBOLS OR • Convey ideas without words
ICONS CAN... • Save space and add visual appeal
• Transcend individual languages to com-
municate ideas effectively for international
readers V
FIGURE V–1. Chartfor Choosing Appropriate Visuals(continued)
)sdnasuoht
ni( stinU
fo rebmuN
6860ch0V.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:57 AM Page 555
Legend MMooddeell 1120..CA3139
Steps Taken During Widespread Power Outage
D a p bu n u o i d b w ld l i h n c in o e s g s d a s p f l i i e t v a t e y ls w o ir r es T s o r e f a r c n v u i s n s m t g o is m th s e o io r u s n s a li n n d e s s
M l n in u a e m i s n b s d e e i r s s r t v r o i i n b f g u t l i a o r n ge S eq u u b i s p t m at e io n n t
customers

=== Page 589 ===
6860ch0V.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:57 AM Page 556
556 visuals
One way to use visuals wisely is to make their placement a part of your
outlining process. At appropriate points in your outline, either make a
rough sketch of the visual, if you can, or write “illustration of...,”
noting the source of the visual and enclosing each suggestion in a text
box. You may also include sketches of visuals in your thumbnail pages,
as discussed in layoutand design.
When you write the draft, place visuals as close as possible to the
text where they are discussed—in fact, no visual should precede its first
text mention. Refer to graphics (such as drawings and photographs) as
“figures” and to tables as “tables.” Clarify for readers why each visual
is included in the text. The amount of description you should provide
will vary, depending on your readers’ backgrounds. For example, non-
experts may require lengthier explanations than experts need.
ETHICS NOTE Obtain written permission to use copyrighted visuals—
including images and multimedia material from Web sites—and ac-
knowledge borrowed material in a source line below the caption for a
figure and in a footnote at the bottom of a table. Use a site’s “Contact
Us” page to request approval. Acknowledge your use of any public (un-
copyrighted) information, such as demographic or economic data from
government publications and Web sites, with a source line. See also
copyright, documenting sources, and plagiarism. ✦
WRITER’S CHECKLIST Creating and Integrating Visuals
CREATING VISUALS
(cid:3)
Keep visuals simple:Include only information needed for discussion
in the textand eliminate unneeded labels,arrows,boxes,and lines.
(cid:3)
Position the lettering of any explanatory textor labels horizontally;
allow adequate white space within and around the visual.
(cid:3)
Specify the units of measurementused,make sure relative sizes are
clear,and indicate distance with a scale when appropriate.
(cid:3)
Use consistentterminology;for example,do notrefer to the same in-
formation as a “proportion”in the textand a “percentage”in the vi-
sual.
(cid:3)
Define abbreviationsthe firsttime they appear in the textand in fig-
ures and tables.If any symbols are notself-explanatory,include a key,
as in Figure G–10.
(cid:3)
Give each visual a caption or concise titlethatclearly describes its
V content,and assign figure and table numbers if your documentcon-
tains more than one illustration or table.
(cid:3)
Refer to visuals in the textof your documentby their figure or table
numbers.

=== Page 590 ===
6860ch0V.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:57 AM Page 557
voice 557
Writer’s Checklist:Creating and Integrating Visuals (continued)
INTEGRATING VISUALS
(cid:3)
Clarify for readers why each visual is included in the textand provide
an appropriate description.
(cid:3)
Place visuals as close as possible to the textwhere they are discussed,
butafter their firsttextmention.
(cid:3)
Refer to visuals in the textof your documentas “figures”or “tables”
and by their figure or table numbers.
(cid:3)
Consider placing lengthy,detailed visuals in an appendixand refer
to itin the text.
(cid:3)
In documents with more than five illustrations or tables,include a
section following the table of contentstitled “Listof Figures”or “List
of Tables”thatidentifies each by number,title,and page number.
(cid:3)
Check the editorial guidelines or recommended style manual when
preparing visuals for a trade journal article.
voice
In grammar, voice indicates the relation of the subject to the action of
the verb. When the verb is in the active voice, the subject acts; when it is
in the passive voice, the subject is acted upon.
ACTIVE David Cohen wrotethe newsletter article.
[The subject, David Cohen, performs the action;
the verb, wrote, describes the action.]
PASSIVE The newsletter article was writtenby David Cohen.
[The subject, the newsletter article, is acted upon; the
verb, was written, describes the action.]
The two sentences say the same thing, but each has a different empha-
sis: The first emphasizes David Cohen; the second emphasizes the news-
letter article. In technical writing, it is often important to emphasize
who or what performs an action. Further, the passive-voice version is
indirect because it places the performer of the action behind the verb in-
stead of in front of it. Because the active voice is generally more direct,
more concise, and easier for readersto understand, use the active voice V
unless the passive voice is more appropriate, as described on page 559.
Whether you use the active voice or the passive voice, be careful not to
shift voices in a sentence.

=== Page 591 ===
6860ch0V.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:57 AM Page 558
558 voice
(cid:2) David Cohen corrected the inaccuracy as soon as it was identified
identified it
bythe editor.
^
Using the Active Voice
Improving Clarity. The active voice improves clarityand avoids confu-
sion, especially in instructionsand manuals.
PASSIVE Sections B and C should be checkedfor errors.
[Are they already checked?]
ACTIVE Checksections B and C for errors.
[The performer of the action, you, is understood: (You)
Checkthe sections.]
Active voice can also help avoid dangling modifiers.
PASSIVE Hurrying to complete the work, the cables were
connectedimproperly.
[Whowas hurrying? The implication is the cables were
hurrying!]
ACTIVE Hurrying to complete the work, the technician connected
the cables improperly.
[Here, hurrying to complete the workproperly modifies
the performer of the action: the technician.]
Highlighting Subjects. One difficulty with passive sentences is that
they can bury the performer of the action in expletives and preposi-
tional phrases.
PASSIVE It was reported bythe testing staff that the new model is
defective.
ACTIVE The testing staff reportedthat the new model is defective.
Sometimes writers using the passive voice fail to name the performer—
information that might be missed.
PASSIVE The problem was discoveredyesterday.
ACTIVE The maintenance technician discoveredthe problem
yesterday.
V
Achieving Conciseness. The active voice helps achieve conciseness be-
cause it eliminates the need for an additional helping verb as well as an
extra prepositionto identify the performer of the action.

=== Page 592 ===
6860ch0V.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:57 AM Page 559
voice 559
PASSIVE Arbitrary changes in policy are resented byemployees.
ACTIVE Employees resentarbitrary changes in policy.
The active-voice version takes one verb (resent); the passive-voice ver-
sion takes two verbs (are resented) and an extra preposition (by).
Using the Passive Voice
The passive voice is sometimes effective or even necessary. Indeed, for
reasons of tact and diplomacy, you might need to use the passive voice
to avoid accusing others.
ACTIVE Your staff did not meetthe quota last month.
PASSIVE The quota was not metlast month.
ETHICS NOTE Be careful, however, not to use the passive voice to evade
responsibility or to obscure an issue or information that readers should
know.
(cid:2) Several mistakes were made. [Whomade the mistakes?]
(cid:2) It has been decided. [Whohas decided?]
See also ethics in writing. ✦
When the performer of the action is either unknown or unimpor-
tant, of course, use the passive voice. (“The copper mine was discov-
eredin 1929.”) When the performer of the action is less important than
the receiver of that action, the passive voice is sometimes more appro-
priate. (“Ann Bryant was presentedwith an award by the president.”)
When you are explaining an operation in which the reader is not
actively involved or when you are explaining a process or a procedure,
the passive voice may be more appropriate. In the following example,
anyone—it really does not matter who—could be the performer of the
action.
(cid:2) Area strip mining is usedin regions of flat to gently rolling terrain,
like that found in the Midwest. Depending on applicable reclama-
tion laws, the topsoil may be removedfrom the area to be mined,
stored, and later reappliedas surface material during reclamation
of the mined land. After the removal of the topsoil, a trenchis cut
through the overburden to expose the upper surface of the coal to
be mined. The overburden from the first cut is placedon the un-
mined land adjacent to the cut. After the first cut has been
completed, the coal is removed. V
Do not, however, simply assume that any such explanation should be in
the passive voice; in fact, as in the following example, the active voice is
often more effective.

=== Page 593 ===
6860ch0V.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:57 AM Page 560
560 voice
(cid:2) In the operation of an internal combustion engine, an explosion in
the combustion chamber forcesthe pistons down in the cylinders.
The movement of the pistons in the cylinders turnsthe crankshaft.
Ask yourself, “Would it be of any advantage to the reader to know the
performer of the action?” If the answer is yes, use the active voice, as in
the previous example.
ESL TIPSfor Choosing Voice
Differentlanguages place differentvalues on active-voice and passive-
voice constructions.In some languages,the passive is used frequently;
in others,hardly atall.As a nonnative speaker of English,you may have
a tendency to follow the pattern of your native language.Butremem-
ber,even though technical writing may sometimes require the passive
voice,active verbs are highly valued in English.
V

=== Page 594 ===
6860ch0WY.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:57 AM Page 561
W
wait for / wait on
Wait on should be restricted in writing to the activities of hospitality
and service employees. (“We need extra staff to wait on customers.”)
Otherwise, use wait for. (“Be sure to wait for Ms. Garcia’s approval.”)
See also idioms.
Web design
Designing Web sites and pages requires that you stay current with
changes in technology, so the best sources for guidance are on the Web
itself.* To find many useful tutorials, use a search engine to search for
tutorial along with other keywords such as HTML, XHTML, or Web
design. For advice on developing your site’s content for online readers,
see writing for the Web.
WEB LINK Web Design Resources
For Mike Markel’s helpful overview of the process and principles of
designing Web sites,see bedfordstmartins.com/alredtechand select
Tutorials,“Designing for the Web.”For links to more tutorials as well
as sites thatprovide advice for improving accessibility for people with
disabilities,selectLinks for Technical Writing.
Audience and Purpose
Many of the principles covered throughout this book apply to designing
Web sites. For example, when planning a Web site and designing Web
pages, carefully consider your purposeand audience. Most professional
Web sites have well-defined goals, such as reference, marketing, educa-
tion, publicity, or advocacy. One way to help you achieve your goals is
to create a clear purpose statement, as shown in the following examples.
W
*Some useful sites include www.w3.org, webmonkey.com, and trace.wisc.edu/world/
web/.
561

=== Page 595 ===
6860ch0WY.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:57 AM Page 562
562 Web design
EXTERNAL SITE The purpose of this site is to enable our customers
to locate product information, place online orders,
and contact our customer-service department.
INTERNAL SITE The purpose of this site is to provide SNR Security
Corporation employees, suppliers, and partner
organizations with a single, consistent, and up-to-
date resource for materials about SNR Security.
As these examples show, the two general kinds of sites are external and
internal. External Web sites target an audience from the entire Internet.
Internal Web sites are designed for audiences either on an intranet (a
network within an organization) that is not accessible to audiences out-
side that organization or an extranet (a password-protected site) avail-
able exclusively to trusted partners and suppliers to provide them with
common data and documents.
Access for People with Disabilities
Design elements such as colorful graphics, animation, and streaming
video and audio can be barriers to people with impaired vision or hear-
ing or those who are color-blind. Use the following strategies to meet
the needs of such audiences.
• Avoid frames, complex tables, animation, JavaScript, and other de-
sign elements incompatible with text-only browsers and adaptive
technologies, such as voice or large-print software.
• Provide HTML versions of pages and documents whenever pos-
sible because this format is most compatible with the current
generation of screen readers.
• Include text-equivalent captions with graphic or audio elements.
• Design for the color-blind reader by making meaning independent of
color. For example, rather than asking users to “Click on the green
button for more information,” label the button (“Click Here”) or
embed a link in a sentence: “See our catalogfor more information.”
You may want to consider offering different options for site visitors,
such as full-graphics, light-graphics, and text-only versions.
DIGITAL TIP
Testing Your Web Site
You mighttake advantage of Web sites thatwill testa limited sample of
your site’s features for free.(They also offer greatly expanded testing for
W a fee.) For more on this topic,see bedfordstmartins.com/alredtechand
selectDigital Tips,“Testing Your Web Site.”

=== Page 596 ===
6860ch0WY.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:57 AM Page 563
Web design 563
WRITER’S CHECKLIST Designing Web Pages
Many of the guidelines on typography in layoutand designare applicable
to Web pages;however,notall apply,so keep the following in mind:
(cid:2)
Work with the Webmaster or site administrator to optimize your site
for speed of access and to maintain technical and design standards.
On campus,consultyour instructor or campus computer support
staff aboutstandards for posting content.
(cid:2)
Drafta navigation chartor map of your site early in the design
process to make information logically accessible in the fewest
possible steps (or clicks).
(cid:2)
Anchor links on relevantwords in the sentence (“For more informa-
tion aboutemploymentopportunities,visitHuman Resources.”)
(cid:2)
Avoid overusing complex graphics and animation thatcan clutter or
slow access to your site.For high-resolution graphics,consider using
thumbnails (images reduced to 10 to 15 percentof the original file
size) thatlink to the original-size image.
(cid:2)
Use lighter colors for backgrounds and use typeface colors thatcon-
trast(butdo notclash) with background colors.
(cid:2)
Limitthe number of typeface colors as well as styles;use boldface
type and uppercase letters sparingly.Use underlined textonly for
links.
(cid:2)
Use sans serif fonts for textpassages;they are generally more legible
on computer screens than are serif fonts.
(cid:2)
Separate textfrom graphics with generous blank space (the equiva-
lentof white space).
(cid:2)
Limityour textlines to 50 to 70 characters (or 10 to 12 words) for
readability.
(cid:2)
Use a consistentstyle for headingsand subheadings.
(cid:2)
Block-indenttextsections thatyou expectviewers to read in detail.
(cid:2)
Testyour design and load time by viewing iton alternate browsers
and slow modems.
(cid:2)
Incorporate the name of your organization and its logo in a banner at
the top of each page.
(cid:2)
Include a link to your site’s Privacy Statement(see page 573).
(cid:2)
Check thatall your links work,particularly after site changes.
W

=== Page 597 ===
6860ch0WY.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:57 AM Page 564
564 when / where / that
when / where / that
Whenandif(or if and when) is a colloquial expression that should not
be used in writing.
(cid:3) When and iffunding is approved, you will get the position.
If
(cid:3) When and iffunding is approved, you will get the position.
^
In phrases using the where...at construction, at is unnecessary and
should be omitted.
(cid:3) Where is his office at?
Do not substitute wherefor thatto anticipate an idea or fact to follow.
that
(cid:3) I read in the newsletter whereresearch funding will increase.
^
whether
Whether communicates the notion of a choice. The use of whether or
notto indicate a choice between alternatives is redundant.
(cid:3) The client asked whether or notthe proposal was finished.
The phrase as to whether is clumsy and redundant. Either use whether
alone or omit it altogether.
We have decided to contract.
(cid:3) As to whether we willcommit to a long-term contract, we have
^ ^
decided to do so.
while
While, meaning “during an interval of time,” is sometimes substituted
for connectives like and, but, although, and whereas. Used as a connec-
tive in that way, whileoften causes ambiguity.
and
(cid:3) Ian Evans is a media director, whileJoan Thomas is a vice
^
W president for research.
Do not use whileto mean althoughor whereas.

=== Page 598 ===
6860ch0WY.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:57 AM Page 565
white papers 565
Although
(cid:3) WhileRyan Sims wants the job of engineering manager, he has not
^
yet applied for it.
Restrict whileto its meaning of “during the time that.”
(cid:3) I’ll have to catch up on my reading whileI am on vacation.
white papers
A white paper is a document that announces a new product or a newly
developed technical or business solution to a common problem. White
papers function as (1) educational tools that provide credibility for an
organization and (2) marketing tools to establish a company’s market
position as an industry leader. White papers are often posted on a com-
pany’s Web site, distributed to potential customers at trade shows and
conferences, and published at Web sites that feature white papers from
various sources.
Using Persuasion
White papers are promotional documents, so they must be interesting
to read, reflect strong empathy with the reader, and use effective per-
suasion. White papers require that writers shift from a technology-
centered point of view to the “you”viewpoint, as suggested in the fol-
lowing example from Darren K. Barefoot’s article “Ten Tips on Writing
White Papers.”*
TECHNOLOGY Buy a DVD player because it has a 128-bit over-
CENTERED sampling and advanced virtual surround sound.
READER Buy a DVD player because you want better sound
CENTERED and a crisper picture.
If your white paper is targeted to nonspecialists, leave the details to the
technical manuals, sales brochures, and press releases. Focus on your
readers’ concerns and explain clearly how your company or product
can solve their specific problems.
Preparing to Write
Begin by checking with management to determine their goals for the
white paper and how it fits into their overall strategy. Then analyze
W
*Darren K. Barefoot, “Ten Tips on Writing White Papers,” IntercomFebruary 2002,
12–13.

=== Page 599 ===
6860ch0WY.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:57 AM Page 566
566 white papers
your audience to determine whether your readers are technical experts
or nonexperts such as executives. Plan your language and approach ap-
propriately. For example, experts understand and appreciate technical
terminology, whereas executives tend to focus on the bottom line and
the benefits of solving a problem.
Decide on the most appropriate method of development and then
create an outline that offers your product or solution as the most effec-
tive way to solve the readers’ problem. An outline helps provide coher-
ence and transition to your draft so that readers can follow the
development of a new technology or product as the white paper moves
smoothly from the introduction to the conclusion. Define any new
terms, avoid affectation, and follow the principles of effective technical
writing style.
As you consider your scope, make certain that your white paper
deals with only one product or solution; for multiple topics, use mul-
tiple white papers. The length of your white paper depends on the com-
plexity of your product, but try to keep it as brief as possible. If your
document runs more than ten pages, include a table of contents.
Planning Layoutand Design
A good design can make the most complex information look accessible
and enable your readers to retrieve information easily. A white paper
should make good use of visuals to help readers grasp and retain your
message. Use such visuals carefully, however. A complex visual that re-
quires paragraphs of explanation is more likely to hinder your reader’s
understanding than enhance it. Make the best use of headings, lists,
call-outs, text boxes, and other devices that are described in layoutand
design.
Developing Major Sections
The introduction to a white paper should attract your readers’ interest
by explaining the problem that needs to be solved. Your readers might
be persuaded to accept your message more readily if they believe your
company is developing innovative products, as in the following ex-
ample:
(cid:3) The rings of Saturn have puzzled astronomers ever since Galileo
discovered them in 1610 using the first telescope. Recently, even
more rings have been discovered....
Our company’s Scientific Instruments Division designs and
W manufactures research-quality, computer-controlled telescopes
that promise to solve the puzzles of Saturn’s rings by enabling

=== Page 600 ===
6860ch0WY.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:57 AM Page 567
who / whom 567
scientists to use multicolor differential photometry to determine
the rings’ origins and composition.
Use the body of a white paper to provide supporting evidence that
your product or solution is the best way to solve the readers’ problem.
Be careful not to be too biased toward your own product, however, es-
pecially early in your white paper. You might start by explaining what
led to the development of the problem and how its solution impacts all
customers in the industry. Describe the kind of technology that can
solve the problem, and develop a high standard for the needed solution.
Then explain precisely how your way of solving the customer’s problem
is the best way to meet that standard. Provide persuasive supporting ev-
idence from outside sources. See researchand documenting sources.
The conclusion of a white paper should summarize the problem
and how your solution best solves it. As a marketing tool, your white
paper should conclude by telling readers how to contact your company
for more information.
Revising and Getting Clearances
Ask management, subject-matter experts, and perhaps your legal de-
partment to read the finished draft to make certain it meets manage-
ment’s objectives, is technically accurate, and stays within legal require-
ments. Be sure to cite any outside sources used and get permission from
any source quoted. See copyrightand plagiarism.
WEB LINK White Papers
For links to online collections of white papers,see bedfordstmartins
.com/alredtechand selectLinks for Handbook Entries.
who / whom
Whois a subjective case pronoun, and whomis the objective case form
of who. When in doubt about which form to use, substitute a personal
pronoun to see which one fits. If he, she, or theyfits, use who.
(cid:3) Whois the training coordinator?
[You would say, “Sheis the training coordinator.”]
If him, her, or themfits, use whom.
(cid:3) It depends on whom? W
[You would say, “It depends on them.”]

=== Page 601 ===
6860ch0WY.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:57 AM Page 568
568 who’s / whose / of which
who’s / whose / of which
Who’sis the contraction of who is. (“Who’sscheduled today?”) Whose
is the possessive case of who. (“Consider whosebudget should be cut.”)
Normally, whose is used with persons, and of which is used with
inanimate objects.
(cid:3) The employee whosecar had been towed away was angry.
(cid:3) Completing a Ph.D. in engineering is an achievement of whichto
be proud.
If of which causes a sentence to sound awkward, whose may be used
with inanimate objects. (Compare “The business the profits of which
steadily declined” with “The business whoseprofits steadily declined.”)
-wise
Although the suffix-wise often seems to provide a tempting shortcut in
writing, it leads more often to affectation than to economical expres-
sion. It is better to rephrase the sentence.
has a efficiency rating.
(cid:3) Our department rateshigh efficiencywise.
^ ^
The -wise suffix is appropriate, however, in instructions that indi-
cate certain space or directional requirements (lengthwise, clockwise).
word choice
Mark Twain once said, “The difference between the right word and al-
most the right word is the difference between ‘lightning’ and ‘lightning
bug.’” The most important goal in choosing the right word in technical
writing is the preciseness implied by Twain’s comment. Vague words
and abstract words defeat preciseness because they do not convey the
writer’s meaning directly and clearly.
VAGUE It was a productivemeeting.
PRECISE The meeting resulted in the approval of the health-care
benefits package.
W
In the first sentence, productive sounds specific but conveys little infor-
mation; the revised sentence says specifically what made the meeting

=== Page 602 ===
6860ch0WY.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:57 AM Page 569
writing a draft 569
“productive.” Although abstractwords may at times be appropriate to
your topic, using them unnecessarily will make your writing difficult to
understand.
Being aware of the connotations and denotations of words will
help you anticipate your reader’s reactions to the words you choose.
(See also audience, connotations / denotations, and readers.) Under-
standing antonyms (fresh/stale) and synonyms (notorious/infamous)
will increase your ability to choose the proper word. Make other usage
decisions carefully, especially in technical contexts, such as average /
median / meanand biannual / biennial.
Although many of the entries throughout this book will help you
improve your word choices and avoid impreciseness, the following en-
tries should be particularly helpful:
affectation 22 euphemisms 180
biased language 46 idioms 248
buzzwords 57 jargon 285
clichés 71 logic errors 312
conciseness 90 vague words 546
A key to choosing the correct and precise word is to keep current in
your reading and to be aware of new words in your profession and in
the language. In your quest for the right word, remember that there is
no substitute for an up-to-date dictionary. See also English as a second
language.
WEB LINK Wise Word Choices
For online exercises on word choice,see bedfordstmartins.com/alredtech
and selectExercise Central.
writing a draft
You are well prepared to write a rough draft when you have established
your purpose and reader’s needs, considered the context, defined your
scope, completed adequate research, and prepared an outline (whether
rough or developed). (See also audience, outlining, and readers.) Writ-
ing a draft is simply transcribing and expanding the notes from your
outline into paragraphs, without worrying about grammar, refinements
of language, or spelling. Refinement will come with revisionand proof-
reading. See also “Five Steps to Successful Writing.”
W
Writing and revising are different activities. Do not let worrying
about a good opening slow you down. Instead, concentrate on getting

=== Page 603 ===
6860ch0WY.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:58 AM Page 570
570 writing for the Web
your ideas on paper—now is not the time to polish or revise. Do not
wait for inspiration—treat writing a draft as you would any other on-
the-job task.
WRITER’S CHECKLIST Writing a Rough Draft
(cid:2)
Setup your writing area with whatever supplies you need (laptop,
notepads,reference material,and so on).Avoid distractions.
(cid:2)
Resistthe temptation of writing firstdrafts on the computer without
planning.
(cid:2)
Use a good outline as a springboard to startand to write quickly.
(cid:2)
Give yourself a settime in which you write continuously,regardless
of how good or bad your writing seems to be.Butdon’tstop if you are
rolling along easily—keep your momentum.
(cid:2)
Startwith the section thatseems easiest.Your readers will neither
know nor care thatthe middle section of the documentwas the first
section you wrote.
(cid:2)
Keep in mind your readers’needs,expectations,and knowledge of
the subject.Doing so will help you write directly to your readers and
suggestwhich ideas need further development.
(cid:2)
When you come to something difficultto explain,try to relate the
new conceptto something with which the readers are familiar,as
discussed in figures of speech.
(cid:2)
Routinely save to your hard drive and create a backup copy of your
documents on separate disks or on the company network.
(cid:2)
Give yourself a small reward—a shortwalk,a softdrink,a brief chat
with a friend,an easy task—after you have finished a section.
(cid:2)
Reread whatyou have written when you return to your writing.
Seeing whatyou have already written can return you to a productive
frame of mind.
writing for the Web
In the workplace, those who write content for Web sites are not always
the same people who design the sites. This entry provides guidelines
only for those writing for an online audience; for more information on
Web-site design, see Web design.
W
ETHICS NOTE For questions about the appropriateness of content you
plan to post on the Web, check with your Webmaster or manager to de-

=== Page 604 ===
6860ch0WY.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:58 AM Page 571
writing for the Web 571
termine if your content complies with your organization’s Web policy.
On campus, consult your instructor or campus computer support staff
about standards for posting Web content. See ethics in writing. ✦
Crafting Contentfor Web Pages
Because most readersscan Web pages for specific information, the way
you write and organize your information will greatly affect your read-
ers’ understanding. State your important points first, before any de-
tailed supporting information. (This method is called inverted pyramid
organization.) Keep your writing style simple and straightforward, and
avoid such directional cues as “as shown in the example below” that
make sense on the printed page but not on a Web page. Use the follow-
ing techniques to make your content more accessible to readers.
Headings. Break up dense blocks of text with short paragraphs that
stand out and can be quickly scanned and absorbed. Use informative
headings to help readers identify topics and decide at a glance whether
to read a passage. Headings also clarify text by highlighting structure
and organization as they also signal transitions from one topic to the
next.
Lists. Use bulleted and numbered lists to break up dense paragraphs,
reduce text length, and highlight important content.
Keywords. To help search engines and your audience find your site,
use keywords in the first fifty or so words of your text.
WITHOUT We are proud to introduce a new commemorative coin
KEYWORDS honoring our bank’s founder and president. The item
will be available on this Web site after December 3,
2009, which is the hundredth anniversary of our first
deposit.
WITH The new Reynoldscommemorative coin features a
KEYWORDS portrait of George G. Reynolds, the founder and pres-
ident of Reynolds Bank. The coin can be purchased
after December 3, 2009, in honor of the hundredth
anniversary of the first Reynoldsdeposit.
Graphics. Graphics provide visual relief from text and make your site
attractive and appealing. Use only visualsthat are appropriate for your
audience and purpose, however, and use graphics that load quickly.
W
Hyperlinks. Use internal hyperlinks to help readers navigate the infor-
mation in your site. If a passage of text is longer than two or three

=== Page 605 ===
6860ch0WY.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:58 AM Page 572
572 writing for the Web
screens, create a table of contents of hyperlinks for it at the top of the
Web page and link each item to the relevant content further down the
page. Use external hyperlinks to enrich coverage of your topic with in-
formation outside your site and to help reduce content on your page.
When you do, consider placing an icon or a text label next to the hyper-
link to inform users that they are leaving the host site. In general, avoid
too many hyperlinks within text paragraphs because they can distract
readers, make scanning the text difficult, and tempt readers to leave
your site before reaching the end of your page.
Fonts. Font sizes and styles affect screen legibility. Because computer
screens display fonts at lower resolutions than does printed text, sans
serif fonts work better for online text passages. Consult your Webmaster
(or your manager) about your organization’s font preferences. Do not
use all capital letters or boldface type for blocks of text because they
slow the reader. For content that contains special characters (such as for
mathematical or chemical content), consult your Webmaster about the
best way to submit the files for HTML (hypertext markup language)
coding or post them as PDF files.
Line Length. Line length also affects readability because short line
lengths reduce the amount of eye movement necessary to scan text. Op-
timal line length is approximately half the width of the screen. To
achieve this optimal length, draft text that is between 50 and 70 charac-
ters (or between 10 and 12 words) to a line.
Writing for a Global Audience
When you write for public access sites, eliminate expressions and refer-
ences that make sense only to someone very familiar with American
English. Express dates, clock times, and measurements consistent with
international practices. For visuals, choose symbols and icons, colors,
representations of human beings, and captions that can be easily under-
stood, as described in global communication and global graphics. See
also biased languageand English as a second language.
Linking to Reputable Sites
Links to outside sites can expand your content. However, review such
sites carefully before linking to them. Is the site’s author or sponsoring
organization reputable? Is its content accurate, current, and unbiased?
Does the site date-stamp its content with notices such as “This page
was last updated on January 1, 2009”? (For more advice on evaluating
W Web sites, see research.) Link directly to the page or specific area of an
outside site that is relevant to your users, and be sure that you provide a
clear contextfor why you are sending your readers there.

=== Page 606 ===
6860ch0WY.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:58 AM Page 573
writing for the Web 573
Posting an Existing Document
If you post electronic files of existing paper documents to a Web site,
try to retain the document’s original sequence and page layout. If you
shorten or revise the original document for posting to the Web, add a
notice informing readers that it differs from the printed original.
Regardless of format or version used, be sure to follow these
practices:
• Obtain permission from the copyrightholder for the use of copy-
righted text, tables, or images. See also plagiarism.
• Ask the Webmaster or site administrator about the preferred file
format to submit for coding and posting. On campus, consult your
instructor or campus computer support staff.
• Request that the Webmaster optimize any slow-loading graphics
files for quick access.
• Review the document internally before it is posted to the public
site: Is it the correct version? Is any information missing? Do all
links work and go to the right places? See proofreading.
• Ask the Webmaster to create a single-file version of the document
(a version formatted as a single, long Web page) for readers who
will print it to read offline.
ETHICS NOTE Document sources of information—text, images,
streaming video, and other multimedia material—or of help received.
Seek prior approval before using any copyrighted information. Docu-
menting your sources not only is required but also bolsters the credibil-
ity of your site. To document your sources, either provide links to your
source or use a citation, as described in documenting sources. ✦
Protecting the Privacy of Users
Put a link on your Web page to the site’s privacy statement, particularly
if you solicit comments about your content or have an e-mail link for
unsolicited comments for site users. A privacy statement informs site
visitors about how the site sponsor handles solicited and unsolicited in-
formation from individuals, its policy on the use of cookies,* and legal
action it takes against hackers. Inform users if you intend to use their
information for marketing or to share their information with third par-
ties, and give visitors the option of refusing you permission to use or
share their information.
W
*“Cookies” are small files that are downloaded to your computer when you browse
certain Web pages. Cookies hold information, such as your user name and password,
so you do not need to reenter it each time you visit the site.

=== Page 607 ===
6860ch0WY.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:58 AM Page 574
574 writing for the Web
DIGITAL TIP
Using PDF Files
Converting documents such as reports,articles,and brochures to PDF
files allows you to retain the identical look of the printed documents.
The PDF pages will display on-screen exactly as they appear on the
printed page.Readers can read the document online,download and
save it, or print it in whole or in part. For more on this topic, see
bedfordstmartins.com/alredtech and select Digital Tips, “Using PDF
Files.”
W

=== Page 608 ===
6860ch0WY.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:58 AM Page 575
Y
“you”viewpoint
The “you” viewpoint places the reader’s interest and perspective fore-
most. It is based on the principle that most readers are naturally more
concerned about their own needs than they are about those of a writer
or a writer’s organization. See audience.
The “you” viewpoint often, but not always, means using the words
you and your rather than we, our, I, and mine. Consider the following
sentence that focuses on the needs of the writer and organization (we)
rather than on those of the reader.
(cid:3) We must receiveyour signed invoice before we can processyour
payment.
Even though the sentence uses your twice, the words in italics suggest
that the pointof viewcenters on the writer’s need to receive the invoice
in order to process the payment. Consider the following revision, writ-
ten with the “you” viewpoint.
(cid:3) So you can receiveyour payment promptly, please send your
signed invoice.
Because the benefit to the reader is stressed, the writer is more likely to
motivate the reader to act. See also persuasion.
In some instances, as suggested earlier, you may need to avoid
using the pronouns you and your to achieve a positive tone and main-
tain goodwill. Notice how the first of the following examples (with
your) seems to accuse the reader. But the second (without your) uses
positive writing to emphasize a goal that reader and writer share—
meeting a client’s needs.
ACCUSATORY Yourbudget makes no allowance for setup costs.
POSITIVE The budget should include an allowance for setup
costs to meet all the concerns of our client.
As this example illustrates, the “you” viewpoint means more than
using particular pronouns or adopting a particular writing style. By plac-
ing the readers’ interests at the center, you can achieve your purposenot
Y
575

=== Page 609 ===
6860ch0WY.qxp_jt 8/25/08 10:58 AM Page 576
576 your / you’re
only in correspondence but also in proposals, brochures, many reports,
and presentations.
your / you’re
Your is a possessive pronoun (“your wallet”); you’re is the contraction
of you are (“You’re late for the meeting”). If you tend to confuse your
with you’re, use the search function of your word processor to review
both terms during proofreading.
Y

=== Page 610 ===
HTW_Cred.qxp 8/22/08 4:06 PM Page 577
Acknowledgments 577
Acknowledgments (continued)
Figure D–12. Exploded-View Drawing. From Xerox Corporation,
WorkCentre XD Series User Guide, page 6. Copyright © Xerox
Corporation. Used with permission.
Figure D–13. Cutaway Drawing (Hard Drive). From Hard Disk Quick
Reference by P. D. Moulton and Timothy S. Stanley. Copyright ©
1989 by Que Publishing. Reprinted with the permission of Pearson
Computer Publishing, a division of Pearson Education.
Figure F–2. Flowchart Using Labeled Blocks. Information from PEPCO,
“How We Restore Power,” Lines 33, no. 7 (July 2004). Reprinted
with permission.
Figure F–3. Flowchart Using Pictorial Symbols. Infographic: FDA Con-
sumer Magazine November–December 2004/Renée Gordon. U.S.
Food and Drug Administration. 5600 Fishers Lane. Rockville, MD
20857-0001. 1-888-INFO-FDA. www.fda.gov.
Figure F–5. Formal Report (Cover Memo). Reprinted with the permis-
sion of Susan Litzinger, a student at Pennsylvania State University,
Altoona.
Figure F–7. Online Form with Typical Components. Copyright © 2008
Facebook, Inc. Reprinted with permission.
Figure G–4. International Organization for Standardization Symbols.
From “Graphical Symbols to Address Consumer Needs” by John
Perry, in the ISO Bulletin, March 2003, Volume 34, No. 3, Copy-
right © 2003 by ISO. Reprinted with permission.
Figure G–7. Bar Graph (Quantities of Different Items During a Fixed
Period.) Copyright © 2008 by ASAPS. Reprinted with permission.
Figure I–6. “CharBroil Use and Care Manual (Warning in a Set of In-
structions).” Reprinted with the permission of W. C. Bradley Com-
pany, 1997, Columbus, Georgia.
Figure N–2. Newsletter Article. “Online Solution Speeds Video Deliv-
ery.” From Connection (January 2007): 7. Reprinted with the per-
mission of Ken Cook Company.
Figure N–3. Company Newsletter (Front Page). “Volvo EPA Solution a
Model for 2007.” From Connection (October–November 2006): 1.
Reprinted with the permission of Ken Cook Company.
Figure P–2. Photo (of Aircraft Door). Copyright © 2003 by Ken Cook
Company. Reprinted with the permission of Ken Cook Company.
Figure R–6. Résumé (Highlighting Professional Credentials). Prepared
by Kim Isaacs, Advanced Career Systems, Inc. Reprinted with per-
mission.
Figure R–10. Advanced Résumé (Combining Functional and Chrono-
logical Elements). Prepared by Kim Isaacs, Advanced Career Systems,
Inc. Reprinted with permissions.

=== Page 611 ===
HTW_fm01.qxp 8/22/08 8:52 AM Page ii

=== Page 612 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 579
Index
a / an, 1, 40 in formal reports, 197, 203
as adjectives, 13, 14 for trade journal articles, 535
a few / few, 189 writing strategies for, 8–9
a lot / alot, 2 academic titles, 3, 4
a while / awhile, 44 accept / except, 9
abbreviations, 2–5 acceptance / refusal letters, for
in abstracts, 9 employment, 9–11, 275–76
acronyms and initialisms, 2, 11–12 samples of, 10, 276
capitalization of, 62 accident reports, 541
commas with, 82 sample of, 340
common scholarly, 4–5 accuracy
defining, 556 in application letters, 39
in e-mail, 163 in correspondence, 110–11, 162
in instant messaging, 256–57 of instructions, 263, 316
in international correspondence, 269 in note-taking, 348
of Latin words, 160, 177 in résumés, 472
list of, in reports, 198 revising for, 488
for measurements, 4 accuracy / precision, 11
for names and titles, 4 accusative case, 64
for organization names, 3–4 acknowledgment letters, 11
periods with, 375 sample of, 11
plurals of, 3, 34 acronyms and initialisms, 2, 3, 11–12
spelling out uncommon, 181 action verbs, 64, 484
in tables, 519 actions, imperative mood for, 317
in titles of works, 531 activate / actuate, 12
Web resources for, 5 active listening, 307–9
writer’s checklist for, 3 active voice, 44, 515, 552, 557, 558–59
above, 6 for conciseness, 92, 558–59
abridged dictionaries, 124 for emphasis, 168
absolute phrases, 79 in formal writing, 513
absolute words, 14, 176–77 for highlighting subjects, 558
absolutely, 6 for improving clarity, 558
abstract nouns, 26, 349 infinitives and, 547
abstract words, 6–7 for instructions, 259, 263
affectation and, 22 for newsletters, 345
ethics in using, 178 revising for, 489
figures of speech for clarifying, 190 in sentence construction, 499
as gobbledygook, 233 activities section, in résumés, 485
impreciseness of, 568–69 activity reports, 402
abstracts, 7–9 sample of, 404
vs. executive summaries, 181 actually, 448
579

=== Page 613 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 580
580 Index
actuate / activate, 12 irregular, 21
ad hoc, 12 nouns as, 350
adapt / adept / adopt, 12 ordinal numbers as, 14
addresses, street phrases as, 380, 381
commas with, 81 placement of, 21
inside, in letters, 304 with prepositions, 390
numbers in, 354–55 prepositions confused with, 390
in résumés, 482 questions answered by, 20
return, in letters, 301–4 split infinitives and, 547–48
adept / adopt / adapt, 12 types of, 20
adjective clauses, 15, 171 verbals as, 546, 547, 550
adjectives, 12–16, 335. See also affect / effect, 21–22
modifiers affectation, 22–23
as absolute words, 14 allusions and, 31
adverbs modifying, 19–20 buzzwords, 58
articles, 1, 13, 39–41 ethics in writing and, 22
commas with, 16, 80–81 euphemisms, 180
comparison of, 14 foreign words as, 195
converting verbs into, 505 formal style as, 103, 514
with count nouns, 170 as gobbledygook, 233
demonstrative, 13–14, 170 nominalizations as, 346
descriptive, 13 overusing abbreviations, 2
ESL tips for, 15 Web resources for, 22
indefinite, 14 wordiness as, 92
irregular, 14 affinity, 23
limiting, 13–14 aforementioned, 6
nouns as, 16, 350, 388, 517 aforesaid, 6, 22
numeral, 14 age bias, in writing, 48
phrases as, 380, 381 agenda, for meetings, 324–25
placement of, 15–16 agreement, 23–29. See alsopronoun-
possessive, 14, 170 antecedent agreement; subject-
with prepositions, 390 verb agreement
relative, 91 with collective nouns, 26, 28, 115,
verbals as, 546, 547, 548, 550 350
adjustment letters, 16–19 with demonstrative adjectives, 13,
context in, 99 28–29
full adjustments, 18–19 with each, 24, 27, 160
partial adjustments, 19 with everybody / everyone, 28, 180
samples of, 17, 18 gender, 24, 27–28, 226, 409
Adobe Acrobat, 74 with none, 346
Adobe PDF files, 463, 488, 574 with nor / or, 347
adopt / adapt / adept, 12 number, 24–26, 28–29, 351–52,
advanced searches, 464 409
adverbs, 19–21, 335. See alsomodifiers with one of those . . . who, 357–58
commas with, 80 of person, 24, 550, 551
comparison of, 20–21 with possessive pronouns, 407
conjunctive, 20 pronoun-antecedent, 24, 27–29, 409
intensifiers, 264, 335 subject-verb, 24–27, 499, 551

=== Page 614 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 581
Index 581
ain’t, 234 antecedents, 406. See alsopronoun-
aircraft names, 284 antecedent agreement
all-capital letters agreement with pronouns, 24,
in e-mail, 163–64 27–29, 409
for emphasis, 169, 297 compound, 29
in Web design, 572 implied, 405
all ready / already, 29 personal pronouns and, 409
all right / alright, 30 references to, 32, 405, 453
all together / altogether, 30 antonyms, 33, 529, 569
allude / elude / refer, 30 anxiety, presentation, 400
allusion / illusion, 30 APA documentation, 130, 132–38. See
allusions, 30–31, 269 alsodocumenting sources
almost / most, 31 for articles in periodicals, 133–34,
also, 31 135
ambiguity, 32–33 for books, 132–33
commas for preventing, 77, 81 compared with other styles, 130–31
incomplete comparisons, 32 documentation models, 132–36
missing or misplaced modifiers, 32, for electronic sources, 134–35
335–36 in-text citations, 132, 137
with prepositional phrases, 381 for multimedia sources, 135–36
in pronoun references, 32, 405 other sources, 136
in telegraphic writing, 523 for quotations, 447
using that for, 527 sample list of references, 138
word choice and, 32–33, 70 apostrophes, 34
American Heritage College Dictionary, in contractions, 34, 101
The, 124 forming plurals with, 34
American Medical Association (AMA), indicating omissions, 34
153 showing possession, 34, 65, 387–88
American National Standards Institute, appendixes, 34–35
263 in formal reports, 199
American Psychological Association. in proposals, 413, 419
SeeAPA documentation in requests for proposals, 458
American Society of Indexers, 251 visuals in, 557
America’s Job Bank, 289 application letters, 35–39
among / between, 45 résumés and, 471
amount / number, 33 samples of, 36–38
ampersands, 4, 33, 132 structure and parts of, 35–39
an. Seea / an writing style for, 513
analogy, 190 appositives, 39
definition by, 118 case of, 39, 65, 408
in description, 120 commas with, 78–79
and following proper names, 62
both . . . and usage, 52, 96 gerunds as, 546
commas with, 83 nouns as, 350
in compound subjects, 26–27, 29 arguments, loaded, 314
and / or, 33 articles (a / an / the), 39–41
anecdote, opening with, 279 a / an usage, 1, 40
annotated bibliography, 48–49, 312 count nouns and, 170

=== Page 615 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 582
582 Index
articles (continued) for environmental impact statements,
definite, 39–40, 41 175
eliminating in telegraphic style, 41, layout and design and, 296, 297
522 for manuals, 316
ESL tips for, 40, 170–71 for newsletters, 343
indefinite, 1, 39–40 pace and, 367
as limiting adjectives, 13, 14 for proposals, 413
the usage, 41 purpose and, 435
in titles of works, 41, 61, 530 selecting the medium for, 494
when not to use, 40 tone and, 532
Articles by Topic (Inc.com), 465 usability testing and, 543–45
articles in periodicals. See also usage and, 545
newsletter articles; trade journal for visuals, 553
articles for Web sites, 561–62, 570
APA documentation of, 133–34, 135 for white papers, 565
electronic, documenting, 135, 141, writing style and, 103, 513
147 “you” viewpoint for, 575–76
evaluating, 466–67 augment / supplement, 43
IEEE documentation of, 140, 141 author-date method of documentation,
MLA documentation of, 146, 147 130. See alsoAPA documentation
online databases and indexes for, authorization request, in proposals,
461–62 421
titles for, 61, 95, 444, 529–30, 531 authors, documenting
with unknown author, 134, 140, 146 in bibliographies, 48
writing style for, 513 corporate, 133, 134, 139, 141, 146,
as / because / since, 41 147
as / like, 306–7 of electronic sources, 134–35, 141,
as / than, and pronoun case, 64, 65 147
as much as / more than, 41–42 multiple, 133, 139, 145
as such, 42 multiple, in citations, 132
as to whether, 564 unknown, 48, 134, 140, 141, 146,
as well as / both, 42 147
ASCII résumés, 480, 487 auxiliary verbs, 550
assure / insure / ensure, 263 average / median / mean, 44
asterisks, 163–64 awhile / a while, 44
astronomical terms, 61 awkwardness, 44
atlases, 463 ambiguity and, 33
attachments, e-mail, 100, 163, 164 expletives and, 182
attention-getting statement, opening inverted word order, 506
with, 393 revising, 489
attributive adjectives, 16 word choice and, 70
audience, 42–43 writer’s checklist for eliminating, 44
analyzing needs of, xvi–xviii, 42–43,
389, 392 back matter
building goodwill for, 104–5 for formal reports, 196, 199–200
content management for, 97 for proposals, 419
defining terms for, 43, 117 background
diverse, writing for, 43 in environmental impact statements,
draft writing and, 569 174–75

=== Page 616 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 583
Index 583
opening with, 278 organizational, 49–52
in proposals, 420, 433 writing strategies for, 51–52
bad / badly, 45 body
bad-news patterns. See alsonegative for feasibility reports, 188
messages for formal reports, 196, 198–99,
in correspondence, 106–8 210–14
cultural differences in, 265 of presentations, 394
positive writing and, 386–87 for proposals, 418, 419
refusal letters, 449–52 for reports, 454
bar graphs, 236–38, 240, 554 of tables, 520
barely, 153 for white papers, 567
bcc: notations, 163, 306 body depictions, for global graphics,
be sure to / be sure and, 45 231, 232
because, reason is, 448 body movement, in presentations, 399,
because / since / as, 41 400
because of / due to, 159 boilerplate material, copyright and, 102
behavioral interviews, 274 boldface type. See alsotypography
beside / besides, 45 for emphasis, 169, 298
between / among, 45 for headings, 298
between you and me / between you and in Web design, 572
I, 46, 390 books
bi- / semi-, 46 APA documentation of, 132–33, 134
biannual / biennial, 46 capitalization in titles, 61, 95
biased evidence, 313 evaluating, 466
biased language, 46–48. See alsosexist IEEE documentation of, 139–40
language italics for titles, 283, 444, 531
ethics in writing and, 46, 178 MLA documentation of, 145–46,
revising for, 489 147
sexist language, 46–47, 226, 241 online catalogs for, 461
bibliographies, 48–49. See also Boolean operators, 464
documenting sources both / as well as, 42
annotated, 48–49, 312 both . . . and, 52, 96
in formal reports, 199 box heads, 519
IEEE style, 131, 139–42, 144 boxes
organization names in, 3 for organizational charts, 362
in proposals, 419 in page design, 300
for research, 462 brackets, 52
biennial / biannual, 46 in equations, 322
bilingual dictionaries, 125 for parenthetical items, 52, 373
blind-copy notations (bcc:), 163, for sic, 52, 446
306 brainstorming, 53–54
block indents, in Web design, 563 in job searches, 286
block quotations, APA style for, 132, during presentations, 396
447 for research, 459
blogs, 49–52, 497 for résumé writing, 481
documenting, 135, 148 brochures, 54–57
ethics in writing for, 51–52 designing, 54–57
external, 49–50 documenting, 136, 142, 149
internal, 50–51 italics for titles, 283, 531

=== Page 617 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 584
584 Index
brochures (continued) subjective case, 63–64, 407–8
using repurposed content for, 455 tests for determining, 65–66, 408–9
visuals for, 155 cause
Web resources for, 57 definition by, 118
writer’s checklist for, 57 false, 313
budget, in proposals, 433 words expressing, 41
bulleted lists, 56, 110, 259, 309, 310, cause-and-effect method of
456. See alsolists development, 66–67, 331, 507
business names. Seeorganization names evaluating evidence, 66–67
but, commas with, 83 linking causes to effects, 67
buzzwords, 57–58, 264 cc: notations, 163, 166, 306
as affectation, 22 CD-ROM publications
as gobbledygook, 233 dictionaries, 124, 125
Web resources on, 58 documenting, 135
cell phones, 495
call for action, in conclusions, 94–95 center on / center around, 67
callouts. Seelabels centuries, format for writing, 115–16
campus career services, 288–89 chalkboards, 396
can / may, 59 channel, 494n. See alsoselecting the
cannot, 59 medium
capital appropriations proposals, 414 chapters and sections
capitalization, 59–62. See alsoall- in feasibility reports, 188
capital letters in manuals, 317
of abbreviations, 62 numbers for, 355
for adjectives of origin, 15 titles of, 62, 284, 444, 531
of events and concepts, 61 charts. See alsovisuals
of first words, 60, 76, 114, 305, 445, documenting, 141
530 flowcharts, 192–94, 555
of letters of alphabet, 62 organizational, 362, 555
in lists, 310 for presentations, 396, 398
of organizations, 61 Chemical Engineering, 533
of professional and personal titles, 62 Chicago Manual of Style (CMS), 140,
of proper nouns, 59–60, 349 141, 515, 536. See also
for quotations, 60, 445 documenting sources
of specific groups, 60 choppy writing, 505
of specific places, 60–61 chronological method of development,
in subject lines, 61, 110 68, 331, 507
of titles of works, 41, 61, 95, 391, for literature reviews, 312
530 in narratives, 339
captions, with visuals, 300, 379, 536 for résumés, 483–84
cardinal adjectives, 14 sample of, 69
career counselors, 288–89 CIO’s Resource Centers, 465
career summary, in résumés, 483 circular definitions, 117
case, 62–66, 407–9 circumlocution, 91
agreement of, 24 citations. See alsodocumenting sources
of appositives, 39, 65, 408 APA style, 130, 132
objective case, 64, 407, 408 IEEE style, 130, 139
possessive case, 64–65, 387–89, 407, MLA style, 131, 145
408 sample pages, 137, 143, 151

=== Page 618 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 585
Index 585
cite / sight / site, 68 revising for, 488
claims unity and, 543
adjustment letters for, 16–19 collaborative writing, 72–75
complaint letters, 87–88 active listening and, 309
clarity, 68–70 coherence in, 72, 73
active voice for, 558 of environmental impact statements,
commas for, 81 176
conciseness and, 90, 259 for journal articles, 534
in correspondence, 109–10 managing conflict, 74
defining terms for, 116–17 outlining in, 363
grammar and usage for, 234–35 of proposals, 414
hyphens for, 246 purpose in, 435
punctuation for, 434 team tasks in, 73–74
semicolons for, 498 Web sites for, 497
in technical writing, 521–22 writer’s checklist for, 74–75
transitions for, 537–39 collective nouns, 349, 350
word choice and, 568–69 agreement with, 26, 28, 115, 350
classification, 127–29. See also colloquialisms, 41
division-and-classification method fine as, 191
of development in informal writing, 514
clauses, 70–71. See alsodependent as nonstandard English, 173
clauses; independent clauses quotation marks for, 444
adjective, 171 colons, 75–76
commas with, 78–79 capitalization of word following, 60,
missing subjects in, 503 76
restrictive and nonrestrictive, for enumeration, 498
470–71 with numbers, 76
clichés, 70, 71 with quotation marks, 76, 444, 445
as figures of speech, 190 in salutations, 75, 304
as gobbledygook, 233 in sentences, 75
revising for, 489 in titles and citations, 75
climactic order, for emphasis, 167 unnecessary use of, 76
clip-art images, 155, 158 color
closed-ended questions, 221 in brochures, 57
closings. See alsoconclusions in global graphics, 230, 232
for application letters, 39 in graphs, 238
for correspondence, 108–9, 305 in maps, 319
cultural differences in, 265–69 in page design, 299
for e-mail, 164–65 in warnings, 261, 263
goodwill, 106 in Web design, 563
for meetings, 328 color-blind readers, 562
for presentations, 394–95 column graphs, 236–38, 554
for refusal letters, 452 columns
clustering, 53–54 in newsletters, 345
coherence, 71–72 page design for, 298, 299
clarity and, 68 in tables, 519–20
outlining and, 72, 363, 566 comma splices, 77, 490
in paragraphs, 370 commands, 337, 499
pronoun references and, 405 in instructions, 259

=== Page 619 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 586
586 Index
commas, 77–83 completeness, revising for, 488
with adjectives, 16, 80–81 complex sentences, 168, 501
with appositives, 39 compliment / complement, 88
avoiding unnecessary, 83 complimentary closings, 60, 305
for clarifying and contrasting, 81 component content-management
for dates, 81–82, 115 systems, 98
for enclosing elements, 78–79, 114, components, definition by, 118–19
470 compose / constitute / comprise, 89–90
with interjections, 80, 264–65 compound antecedents, 29
for introducing elements, 79–80 compound-complex sentences, 501
for items in series, 80–81, 83 compound predicates, 83, 500
for linking independent clauses, 20, compound sentences, 70, 168, 500
78, 82, 500 compound subjects, 500
with names, 81–82 commas with, 83
with numbers, 81–82, 354 possessive case of, 388
for omissions, 81 pronoun case and, 65–66, 408
with other punctuation, 82–83 subject-verb agreement with, 26–27
with quotation marks, 80, 83, 375, compound words, 90
444, 445 hyphens for, 245
common / mutual, 338 plurals of, 351
common knowledge, 384 comprehension tests, 544
common nouns, 60, 349 comprise / compose / constitute, 89–90
communication computer technology. See alsoDigital
global, 228–30 Tips
listening, 307–9 backing up files, 570
selecting the medium, 494–97 clip-art images, 155
company information, in requests for for collaborative writing, 74
proposals, 457 content-management systems, 97–98
comparative form for designing forms, 222
absolute words and, 176–77 desktop publishing software, 300,
of adjectives, 14 345
of adverbs, 20–21 incorporating tracked changes, 489
compare / contrast, 84 for indexing, 252
comparison, 84–85 for layout and design, 300
determining basis of, 85 for letters, 301
incomplete, 32 for mathematical equations, 320–21
like and as for, 307 for newsletters, 345
comparison method of development, for note-taking, 348
85–87, 331 for presentations, 396–97
complaint letters, 87–88 search-and-replace command, 92,
context of, 99 489
responding to, 16–19, 452 style and format templates, 200
sample of, 88 concepts, capitalization of, 61
complement / compliment, 88 conciseness, 90–92. See alsowordiness
complements, 88–89, 500. See also in abstracts, 9
specific types active voice for, 558–59
linking verbs and, 549 avoiding bluntness, 104
types of, 89 in blog writing, 51
verbals as, 171 causes of wordiness and, 90–91

=== Page 620 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 587
Index 587
clarity and, 70, 259 for connecting clauses, 71, 96
compound predicates for, 500 list of common, 20, 82, 96
in international correspondence, 265 for run-on sentences, 376
overdoing, 91 semicolons with, 497
revising for, 489 connotation / denotation, 96
subordination for, 516 connotations
telegraphic style, 522–23 of synonyms, 518, 529
using abbreviations, 2–3 of visuals, 231–32
writer’s checklist for, 91–92 word choice and, 569
conclusions, 93–95. See alsoclosings consensus, 96
in abstracts, 7, 8 consistency
for feasibility reports, 188 proofreading for, 412
for formal reports, 199, 215–16 in repetition, 453–54
lists for, 299 in résumé format, 472
for newsletter articles, 343 revising for, 489
opening with summary of, 278 for visuals, 398, 556
for progress reports, 402 in voice, mood, tense, 551
for proposals, 418, 419, 421, 432, constitute / comprise / compose, 89–90
433 contact lists, 256, 258
for reports, 455 content management, 97–98, 455
revising, 488 systems, 97–98
for test reports, 527 Web resources for, 98
for trade journal articles, 536 writing for, 97
for trip reports, 540 context, 98–100
for trouble reports, 542 assessing, 99–100
for white papers, 567 in bad-news patterns, 106
concrete nouns, 349 design and, 296
concrete words, 6–7 global communication and, 229
conditional statements, subordination global graphics and, 230
for, 516–17 listening and, 307
confidentiality openings and, 35, 100
blogs and, 52 in preparation stage, 389
e-mail and, 162 purpose and, 435
forms and, 218 in refusal letters, 451
instant messaging and, 258 repurposing for, 455
conflict of requests for proposals, 457
in collaborative writing, 74 scope and, 493
in meetings, 327 selecting the medium and, 494
conjugation of verbs, 552 signaling, 100
conjunctions, 95–96. See alsospecific style and, 513
types tone and, 532
capitalization and, 61, 95 for visuals, 553
in compound subjects, 26–27 word choice and, 6
eliminating in telegraphic style, 522 in writing process, xvi–xviii
types of, 71, 95–96 continual / continuous, 100
conjunctive adverbs, 20 continuing pages
for comma splices, 77 for letters, 306
commas with, 20, 82 for memos, 329
in compound sentences, 500 continuing tables, 521

=== Page 621 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 588
588 Index
contractions, 101 acknowledgment letters, 11
apostrophes in, 34 adjustment letters, 16–19
in global communication, 265–69 application letters, 35–39
contrast clarity and emphasis in, 109–10
commas for, 81 complaint letters, 87–88
sentence variety for, 506 cover letters, 111
contrast / compare, 84 documenting, 136, 142, 149
conversational style e-mail, 162–67
in correspondence, 103 employment acceptance / refusal
in informal writing, 514 letters, 9–11, 275–76
for newsletters, 345 good-news / bad-news patterns,
nonstandard English, 173–74 106–8
“cookies,” 573 goodwill tone for, 104–5
coordinate nouns, possessive case of, headings in, 110
388 informal reports as, 454
coordinate series, 80 inquiries and responses, 253–55
coordinating conjunctions international, 265–70
for comma splices, 77 letters, 301–6
commas with, 78, 83 lists in, 110
in compound sentences, 500 memos, 328–29
for connecting clauses, 71, 78, 95 methods of development for, 361
list of, 78, 95 names and titles in, 4, 304–5
for run-on sentences, 376, 490 openings and closings, 108–9, 276,
semicolons with, 498 277
in subordination, 516 outlining for, 363
in titles of works, 61, 95, 530 point of view in, 386
copy notations (cc:), 163, 166, 306 reference letters, 449
“copyleft” Web material, 102, 384 refusal letters, 449–52
copyright, 101–2. See alsodocumenting resignation letters, 467–69
sources test reports as, 527
citing permissions, 198 writer’s checklist for, 110–11
common knowledge and, 384 writing style for, 103, 513, 514
ethics in writing and, 52, 101, 102, cost analysis, in proposals, 421, 427
179 Council on Environmental Quality, 174
exceptions, 101–2 count nouns, 14, 25, 33, 349
permissions, 101 articles and, 170
plagiarism and, 384 ESL tips for, 169–70
repurposing and, 456 fewer / less usage and, 189
for visuals, 153, 155, 380 cover letters, 111
for Web documents, 573 for e-mail attachments, 100, 163
Web resources for, 101 for formal reports, 196, 201
Corel Presentations, 396 for meeting agendas, 325, 326
corporate names. Seeorganization for proposals, 419, 422–23
names providing context in, 100
correlative conjunctions, 96 for questionnaires, 439, 442
double negatives and, 154 samples of, 111, 201, 326, 422–23
in parallel structure, 371 Craigslist, 466
correspondence, 102–11. See also Creative Commons, 456
e-mail; letters; memos credible / creditable, 112
accuracy of, 110–11, 162 criteria / criterion, 112

=== Page 622 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 589
Index 589
critique, 112 deceptive language, avoiding, 178, 377,
cross-references, in index, 252 386
cultural differences. See alsoglobal decimal numbering system
communication; global graphics; for headings, 243–44
international correspondence for outlining, 364–65
in communication styles, 228–30, decimals
327 punctuation with, 82, 376
in directness of messages, 106, 229, writing as numbers, 353
265 declarative sentences, 501
in listening, 307 decreasing-order-of-importance method
currency, of secondary sources, 460 of development, 331, 361
curriculum vitae, 471n. See also for FAQs, 184
résumés for reference letters, 449
cutaway drawings, 155, 157 sample of, 359
defective / deficient, 116
-dendings, 524, 548 defining terms, 116–17. See also
dangling modifiers, 113 definitions
active voice for, 558 for audience, 43, 117, 233
ambiguity and, 32 in executive summaries, 181
infinitive phrases as, 382–83 technical terminology, 175, 281
participial phrases as, 382 definite / definitive, 117
dashes, 114, 245 definite articles, 39–40, 41
for emphasis, 114, 169 definition method of development,
for enclosing elements, 114, 498 117–20, 331
data / datum, 115 definitions. See alsoword meanings
databases, online by analogy, 118
APA documentation of, 135 by cause, 118
IEEE (CMS)documentation of, 141 circular, 117
MLA documentation of, 147 by components, 118–19
for periodicals, 461–62 dictionaries for, 123–25
plain-text résumés for, 487 by exploration of origin, 119
search strategies, 463–65 extended, 117–18
dates, 115–16 formal and informal, 116
apostrophes in, 34 in glossaries, 233
capitalization of, 61 “is when” and “is where,” 117
commas with, 81–82, 115 negative, 116–17, 119–20
on forms, 222 opening with, 279, 281
in global communication, 270 deletions. Seeomissions
in headers or footers, 241 delivery schedules
for international correspondence, in proposals, 421, 427
115, 269, 354, 509 in requests for proposals, 457
in letter heading, 301–4 delivery techniques, for presentations,
numbers in, 353, 354 398–400
plurals of, 34 demonstrative adjectives, 13–14
slashes in, 509 count nouns and, 170
in titles, 197, 419, 530 number agreement with, 13,
days. See alsodates 28–29
capitalization of, 61 demonstrative pronouns, 406
format for writing, 81–82, 115 denotation / connotation, 96
deadlines, in proposals, 421 denotations, and word choice, 569

=== Page 623 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 590
590 Index
dependent clauses, 70 reviewing collaborative documents,
in sentence construction, 500–501 74
sentence faults and, 503 sending e-mail attachments, 164
subordinating conjunctions with, 96 testing your Web site, 562
subordination of, 516–17 using PDF files, 574
description, 120–22 wikis for collaborative documents,
samples of, 120, 121 72
schematics for, 155 direct address, 126
spatial method of development for, commas with, 78, 80, 126
510, 511 for emphasis, 168
descriptive abstracts, 7–9 direct objects, 89, 356
descriptive adjectives, 13, 15–16 gerunds as, 546
descriptors, in electronic résumés, 487 nouns as, 349
design. Seelayout and design pronoun case and, 64
desktop publishing software, 300, 345 transitive verbs and, 293, 356, 549
despite / in spite of, 122 verbals as, 171
detailed solutions, in proposals, 420, direct quotations, 445. See also
426 quotations
details commas with, 80, 445
in description, 120 quotation marks for, 443
interesting, opening with, 278 direct statements, for emphasis, 168
diagnosis / prognosis, 122 disabilities, people with
dialectal English, 173 bias toward, 47–48
dictionaries, 123–25 Web design for, 562
abridged, 124 discreet / discrete, 126
documenting entries, 133, 140, 146 discussion groups, for research, 459
ESL, 124–25 disinterested / uninterested, 126
for research, 462 division-and-classification method of
sample entry, 123 development, 126–29, 331
subject, 125 document design. Seelayout and design
unabridged, 124 document elements. Seereport elements
for usage, 545 document-management systems, 97–98
Web resources for, 124 document titles. Seetitles of works and
for word choice, 569 documents
differ from / differ with, 125 documenting sources, 129–53. See also
different from / different than, 125 APA documentation; authors,
Digital Tips. See alsocomputer documenting; IEEE
technology documentation; MLA
conducting meetings from remote documentation
locations, 324 APA style, 132–38
creating an index, 252 for avoiding plagiarism, 383–84
creating an outline, 365 bibliographies, 48–49
creating styles and templates, 200 in blog writing, 51, 52
incorporating tracked changes, 489 colon use in, 75
leaving an away-from-desk message, common abbreviations for, 4–5
166 common knowledge, 384
preparing an ASCII résumé, 487 comparison of major styles, 130–31
proofreading for format consistency, copyrighted materials, 102
412 in formal reports, 199

=== Page 624 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 591
Index 591
IEEE style, 139–44 educational material, copyright and,
in-text citations, 132, 139, 145 101
journal articles, 535 effect. Seecause-and-effect method of
in literature reviews, 312 development
MLA style, 145–52 effect / affect, 21–22
in note-taking, 347, 348 e.g. / i.e., 5, 160
paraphrasing and, 372, 383–84 either . . . or, 96, 346–47
purposes of, 129–30 agreement with, 26–27, 29
quotations, 445, 447 in parallel structure, 371
samples of, 137–38, 143–44, 151–52 electronic résumés, 289, 480, 486–88
style manuals for, 131, 153 electronic sources. See alsoInternet
for trade journal articles, 536 research strategies
for visuals, 136, 149, 153, 155, 380, APA documentation of, 134–35
395, 520, 556 evaluating, 465–67
for Web sites, 573 IEEE (CMS)documentation of,
for white papers, 567 140–41
Dogpile, 464 MLA documentation of, 147–48
double negatives, 153–54, 386, 453 online catalogs, 461
draft writing online databases and indexes,
integrating visuals in, 553–56 461–62
outlining for, 363, 365, 569 with unknown author, 134, 141
revising, 488–89 elegant variation, 22
for trade journal articles, 535 ellipses, 161
writer’s checklist for, 570 periods as, 375
in writing process, xxi, xxiii, in quoted material, 446
569–70 elliptical constructions, commas with,
drawings, 154–58. See alsovisuals 81
functions of, 554 elude / refer / allude, 30
vs. photographs, 154, 379 e-mail, 162–67. See also
types of, 154–55 correspondence
writer’s checklist for, 157 abbreviations in, 163
due to / because of, 159 addresses, 163, 166, 482
dummy, in page design, 300 away-from-desk message, 166
bad-news patterns for, 107–8
each, 160 confidentiality and, 162
gender agreement with, 27 design considerations, 163–64
subject-verb agreement with, 24, 27, direct address in, 126
160, 409 documenting, 135, 136, 141, 148
each other, 407 ethics in writing and, 162
EBSCOhost’s Academic Search functions of, 162, 164–65, 495
Premier, 461 interviewing for information by, 272
economic / economical, 160 length of, 493
-ed endings, 524, 548 netiquette rules, 163
edited collections, documenting, 133, openings for, 108, 277
140, 146 point of view in, 386
editing. Seeproofreading; revision research using, 459
editions, book, documenting, 133, 139, responding to, 163, 164
146 résumés sent via, 487–88
education section, of résumé, 483 reviewing, 162

=== Page 625 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 592
592 Index
e-mail (continued) encyclopedias
salutations and closings, 164–65 documenting entries, 133, 140,
sending attachments, 100, 163, 164 146
signature blocks for, 165 for research, 462
subject line of, 61, 110, 163, 530 end notations, in correspondence,
titles for, 530 305–6
tone for, 513, 532 end punctuation. Seesentence endings
trip reports as, 539–40 endnotes. Seefootnotes / endnotes
writer’s checklist for, 163, 166–67 English, varieties of
writing style for, 163, 173 colloquial, 173
emoticons, 163 dialectal, 173
emphasis, 167–69 localisms, 173
active voice for, 168 nonstandard, 173–74, 545
clarity and, 68, 109–10 slang, 173–74
climactic order for, 167 standard, 173, 513, 545
colons for, 75 English as a second language (ESL),
conjunctions for, 95 169–72
dashes for, 114, 169 adjective clauses, 171
direct statements for, 168 adjectives, 15
figures of speech for, 190 articles, 40, 170–71
highlighting devices for, 163–64, assigning gender, 226
169, 283, 297–98 avoiding shifts in voice, mood, tense,
intensifiers for, 168, 264 551
pace and, 367 choosing voice, 560
parallel structure for, 371 considering audiences, xvii
position for, 167 count and mass nouns, 169–70
really and actually for, 448 determining mood, 337
repetition for, 168, 453 dictionaries, 124–25
sentence construction and, 167–68 gerunds and infinitives, 171
sentence variety and, 506 idioms, 248
subordination for, 516 possessive pronouns, 407
word order and, 498–99, 502 present perfect verb tense, 172
employment agencies, 290–91 progressive verb tenses, 172, 526
employment experience, in résumé, punctuating numbers, 354
483–84 sentence construction, 502
employment process stating an opinion, 386
acceptance / refusal letters, 9–11 subject of sentence, 499
application letters, 35–39 Web resources for, 172
job descriptions, 285–86 ensure / assure / insure, 263
job interviews, 272–76 enterprise content-management
job searches, 286–91 systems, 98
reference letters, 449 entry lines and fields, in forms,
resignation letters, 467–69 222–23
résumés, 471–88 enumeration
returning job seekers, 485–86 punctuation for, 498
salary negotiations, 275, 491–93 for transitions, 370, 537, 538
enclosure notations, 163, 166, 305–6 environmental impact statements
Encyclopedia of Careers and Vocational (EISs), 174–76
Guidance,The (Hopke), 462 audiences for, 175

=== Page 626 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 593
Index 593
background and scope of, 174–75 ethnic groups
collaborative guidelines for, 176 bias toward, 47
ethics in writing for, 176 capitalization of, 60
guidelines for writing, 175–76 etymologies, in dictionaries, 123
Web resources for, 176 euphemisms, 180
equal / unique / perfect, 176–77 as affectation, 22
-er / -est endings, 14, 20–21 ethics in using, 178
-es endings as gobbledygook, 233
for noun plurals, 350, 387 evaluating sources, 465–67
for plural numbers, 353 Web resources for, 467
for verbs, 351, 551 writer’s checklist for, 466–67
-ese endings, 22 events, capitalization of, 61
essay titles, 444, 531 every
etc., 5, 177 gender agreement with, 27
ethics in writing, 177–79 subject-verb agreement with, 27
affectation and, 22 everybody / everyone, 28, 180
biased language, 46 evidence
copyright and, 101, 102, 153, 155 biased or suppressed, 313
e-mail and confidentiality, 162 guidelines for evaluating, 66–67
for environmental impact statements, in proposals, 412
176 examples, in extended definitions, 118
euphemisms and, 180 except / accept, 9
for forms, 218 exclamation marks, 83, 180–81
I / we usage, 386 with interjections, 180, 264
for instant messaging, 258 exclamatory sentences, 501
logic errors and, 312, 313 executive summaries, 181
for online social communities, 289 in environmental impact statements,
for organizational blogs, 51–52 175
paraphrasing, 372 in formal reports, 198, 205–6
passive voice usage, 178, 559 in proposals, 413, 419, 424
persuasive writing, 377 sample of, 424
plagiarism and, 347, 383–84 writer’s checklist for, 181
positive writing, 386 experience section, of résumé, 483–84
for quotations, 443, 445 experiments, for research, 459
for reference letters, 449 explanations, in bad-news patterns,
repurposing and, 456 106
for requests for proposals, 458 explanatory notes, in formal reports,
for research, 460 199
for résumés, 472 explanatory phrases, as sentence
revision process and, 489 fragments, 505
for sales proposals, 420 expletives, 182, 529
for technical writing, 521 awkwardness and, 44
for trouble reports, 542 passive voice and, 558
using graphs, 236, 553 subject position and, 499
for visuals, 153, 155, 236, 380, 395, wordiness and, 91
553, 556 explicit / implicit, 182
Web resources for, 179 exploded-view drawings, 155, 156
for Web writing, 570–71, 573 exploration of origin, definition by, 119
writer’s checklist for, 179 exposition, 182

=== Page 627 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 594
594 Index
extended definitions, 117–18 in narratives, 339
external proposals, 414 point of view, 385
extranet, 562 first words, capitalization of, 60, 76,
eye contact, in presentations, 399, 400 114, 305, 445, 530
FirstSearch, 461
face-to-face meetings, 495, 496. See Five Steps to Successful Writing,
alsomeetings xv–xxii
fact, 183 flames, e-mail, 163
facts, vs. opinions, 183, 313 flammable / inflammable /
fair use criteria, 101 nonflammable, 192
false cause, 313 flip charts, 396
false conclusions, 66 flowcharts, 192–94, 555
false impressions, and ethics in writing, fonts, 296, 572. See alsotypography
178 footers. Seeheaders and footers
FAQs (Frequently Asked Questions), footnotes / endnotes
183–85 in formal reports, 199
organization of, 184 for graphs, 239
placement of, 185 for tables, 520
questions to include in, 184 for example
writer’s checklist for, 185 vs. e.g. / i.e., 160
faulty logic, in sentences, 504 in sentence fragments, 505
faulty parallelism, 371–72 forceful / forcible, 194
faulty subordination, 503 forecast, opening with, 279
faxes, 496 foreign words in English, 194–95
feasibility reports, 185–88 affectation and, 22, 195
sample of, 186–87 italics for, 194, 283
sections in, 188 foreword / forward, 195
titles for, 530 forewords, in formal reports, 198
Web resources for, 188 formal definitions, 116
Federal Business Opportunities, 414 formal proposals, 418–19
FedStats, 465 formal reports, 195–217, 454. See also
female / male, 188 report elements; reports
few / a few, 189 back matter, 199–200
fewer / less, 189 body of, 198–99
figuratively / literally, 189 format for, 196–200, 218
figures. See alsovisuals front matter, 196–98
list of, 197, 419, 557 sample of, 200–217
numbering, 197, 355, 379 formal style, 513–14. See alsowriting
figures of speech, 189–91 style
as slang, 173 affectation and, 22
in technical writing, 521 in correspondence, 103
films usage and, 545
documenting, 135, 141, 148 format, 218. See alsolayout and design
titles of, 61, 95, 283, 531 for activity reports, 402
fine, 191 for formal reports, 196–200
finite verbs, 550 for letters, 301–6
first / firstly, 191 for memos, 329
first person, 376 for newsletters, 345
antecedents and, 409 for organization, 361

=== Page 628 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 595
Index 595
for progress reports, 402 of nouns and pronouns, 226
proofreading for consistency in, 412 unknown, in salutations, 304
for requests for proposals, 413–14, general and specific methods of
418 development, 227–28, 331
for résumés, 481–85, 487 generalizations, sweeping, 312
for titles of works, 530–32 geographic features
using templates, 200, 301 capitalization of, 60–61
former / latter, 218 commas with, 82
forms, 218–23 visuals for, 319–20, 554
choosing response types, 221 gerund phrases, 383
ethics in writing for, 218 gerunds, 383, 546–47, 550
layout and design for, 221, 222–23 for actions, 317
online vs. paper, 220–21 ESL tips for, 171
samples of, 219–20 object of, and pronoun case, 64
sequencing entries, 222 possessive pronouns with, 388
wording questions, 222 gestures
writing instructions for, 221 cultural differences in, 230
forms of discourse, 339. See also in presentations, 399, 400
description; exposition; narration; global communication, 228–30. See
persuasion alsocultural differences;
fortuitous / fortunate, 224 international correspondence
fractions context and, 100, 229
numerals vs. words, 353 idioms and, 248
slashes in, 508 international correspondence,
front matter, 519 265–70
for formal reports, 196–98 visuals and graphics for, 230–32
for proposals, 419 Web resources for, 230, 269
full-block-style letter, 301, 302 Web writing and, 572
full justification, 298 writer’s checklist for, 229–30
functional résumé, 483–84 global graphics, 230–32
functional shift, 14, 224, 374 for instructions, 260
fused sentences, 376, 490 for manuals, 318
future perfect tense, 524, 525 glossaries, 233
future progressive tense, 524, 526 in environmental impact studies, 175
future tense, 525 in formal reports, 200
in instructions, 259
garbled sentences, 44, 225, 489 in proposals, 413, 419
gathering information. See also goals
research in manuals, 317
interviews, 270–72 purpose and, 435
for presentations, 392–93 gobbledygook, 22, 233
questionnaires, 437–43 good-news patterns, in correspondence,
for trade journal articles, 534–35 106, 108
gender, 226. See alsosexist language good / well, 234
agreement, 24, 27–28, 226, 409 goodwill, establishing
avoiding, in global graphics, 231 with acknowledgment letters, 11
ESL tips for assigning, 226 with adjustment letters, 16–19
female / male usage, 188 brochures for, 54
Ms. / Miss / Mrs. usage, 304, 338 in closings, 106

=== Page 629 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 596
596 Index
goodwill, establishing (continued) on forms, 221
in correspondence, 104–5 general style for, 242–43
in refusal letters, 449–51 in instructions, 260
writer’s checklist for, 105 italics for, 284
“you” viewpoint for, 575–76 levels of, 242, 244, 364–65
Google, 464, 465 in manuals, 316, 317
Google Earth, 463 for meeting minutes, 332
government agencies in newsletters, 345
invitation for bids from, 413 in outlining, 364–65
job searches and, 291 parallel structure for, 371
government publications for résumés, 482
documenting, 136, 142, 149 in table of contents, 197, 519
as public domain, 102 in tables, 519
government specifications, 512 for trade journal articles, 536
grammar, 234–35 in trip reports, 540
proofreading for, 411 typography for, 297
revising for, 489 in Web design, 563, 571
Web resources for, 234 for white papers, 566
grant proposals, 421–33 writer’s checklist for, 244
“granularized” systems, 98n helping verbs, 383, 500, 550
graphics. Seevisuals hierarchical relationships, visuals for,
graphs, 235–40. See alsovisuals 362, 555
avoiding distortion in, 236, 553 highlighting devices
bar, 236–38 for e-mail, 163–64, 165
functions of, 554–55 for emphasis, 164, 169, 283, 297–98
line, 235–36 ethics in writing and, 178
picture, 239 for warnings, 260–61
pie, 238–39 historical terms, 61
for presentations, 398 honors and activities section, of
vs. tables, 235, 239, 519 résumé, 485
writer’s checklist for, 239–40 HotJobs, 486
groupware, 324 humor
Guide to Reference Books (Balay), 462 in global communication, 269
malapropisms, 315
had / have, 524, 525, 548 quotation marks for, 444
Hall, Edward T., 229 hyperbole, 190
handbooks, for research, 462 hyperlinks. Seelinks
hardly, 153 hyphens, 245–47
he / him / his, 376, 406 clarity and, 246
he / she, 241 for compound words, 90, 245
gender agreement with, 27, 226 as highlighting cue, 165
sexist language and, 27, 47, 226, with modifiers, 245
241, 409 with prefixes, 246, 389
headers and footers, 241–42, 298 with spelled-out numbers, 116, 245
on continuing pages, 306, 329, 331 with suffixes, 246
headings, 242–44 for word division, 246–47
for brochures, 55, 56 writer’s checklist for, 246–47
in correspondence, 110, 301–4
decimal numbering system, 243–44 I (personal pronoun)
in document design, 298 between you and . . . , 46, 390

=== Page 630 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 597
Index 597
me / my / mine, 376, 406 in regard to, 453
in technical writing, 385–86 in spite of / despite, 122
usage in résumés, 484 in terms of, 250
icons in-text citations. Seecitations
functions of, 555 increasing-order-of-importance method
in Web design, 299–300 of development, 331–32, 361
ideas for consideration, in conclusions, sample of, 360
94 indefinite adjectives, 14
idioms, 248 indefinite articles, 1, 39–40
clarity and, 70 indefinite pronouns, 406
in dictionaries, 123 oneusage, 357
in global communication, 248, 265, possessive case of, 388–89
269 subject-verb agreement with, 25,
i.e. / e.g., 160 409
IEEE documentation, 130–31, 139–44 independent clauses, 70
for articles in periodicals, 140, 141 in comma splices, 77
for books, 139–40 connecting, 20, 71, 78, 82, 96, 497
compared with other styles, 130–31 in run-on sentences, 376, 490
documentation models, 139–42 in sentence construction, 500–501
for electronic sources, 140–41 indexes
in-text citations, 139, 143 computer technology for, 252
other sources, 141–42 in formal reports, 200
sample bibliography, 144 for manuals, 318
sample page, 143 periodical, 461–62
IEEE Transactions on subject directories, 465
Communications, 533 indexing, 250–53
-ies endings compiling, 251
for noun plurals, 350 cross-referencing, 252
for plural numbers, 353 wording entries, 251
if and when, 564 writer’s checklist for, 252–53
illegal / illicit, 249 indicative mood, 337
illusion / allusion, 30 vs. subjunctive mood, 337–38
illustrations. Seevisuals wordiness of, 92
images, in description, 120 indirect objects, 89, 356
imitation, and affectation, 23 nouns as, 350
imperative mood, 337 pronoun case and, 64
for actions, 317 indirect quotations, 445. See also
for conciseness, 92 quotations
for instructions, 259, 263 punctuating, 80, 443
for nonsexist language, 241 indiscreet / indiscrete, 253
imperative sentences, 501 individual, 253
impersonal point of view, 385–86 industrial specifications, 510–12
implications, in conclusions, 94 infer / imply, 249
implicit / explicit, 182 infinitive phrases, 382–83
imply / infer, 249 infinitives, 382, 547–48, 550
imprecision, and affectation, 23 for actions, 317
impression, and affectation, 23 ESL tips for, 171
in / into, 249 split, 547–48
in order to, 249–50 subject of, and pronoun case, 64
in re, 448 toas sign of, 382, 547–48, 550

=== Page 631 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 598
598 Index
inflammable / nonflammable / instructions, 258–63. See alsomanuals
flammable, 192 active voice for, 558
Infomine, 465 for forms, 221
informal definitions, 116 methods of development for, 332,
informal proposals, 418 507, 510
informal reports, 454 point of view in, 385
informal style, 514–15. See alsowriting testing, 263
style usability of, 543
in correspondence, 103 visuals for, 154, 155, 258, 260
usage and, 545 warnings in, 181, 260–63
informal tables, 521 writer’s checklist for, 263
information models, for content writing style for, 259–60
management, 97 insure / ensure / assure, 263
information sources. SeeInternet intensifiers, 264
research strategies; library adverbs as, 335
research strategies; research for emphasis, 168
informational brochures, 54–57 overuse of, 92
informational interviews, 288 really and actually as, 448
informative abstracts, 7–9 redundant, 6
InfoTrac, 461 veryas, 552
-ing endings intensive pronouns, 407
gerunds, 546, 550 intention, in sentence construction, 501
for present participles, 548 interface, 264
in progressive form, 526 interjections, 264–65
initialisms. Seeacronyms and commas with, 80
initialisms exclamation marks with, 180
initials internal correspondence, 494–95
in correspondence, 305 internal proposals, 414
periods with, 376 international correspondence, 265–70.
initiation, and affectation, 23 See alsoglobal communication
inquiries and responses, 253–55 avoiding euphemisms, 180
for job searches, 291 avoiding figures of speech, 191
responding to inquiries, 255 context and, 100, 229
samples of, 254, 255 cultural differences and, 228–30, 265
for unsolicited proposals, 414 dates in, 115, 269, 270, 354, 509
writing inquiries, 254–55 idioms and, 248, 265
insecurity, and affectation, 23 indirect style for, 106, 229, 265
inside / inside of, 256 punctuation for, 232
inside address, 304 salutations for, 165
insoluble / insolvable, 256 samples of, 266–68
instant messaging (IM), 256–58, 495 visuals and graphics for, 230–32
abbreviations in, 3, 257 Web resources for, 230, 269
ethics in writing and, 258 writer’s checklist for, 269–70
privacy and security with, 258 writing style for, 265–70
sample of, 257 International Organization for
writer’s checklist for, 258 Standardization (ISO) symbols
Institute of Electrical and Electronics for flowcharts, 192, 193
Engineers, Inc. Standards Style for global communication, 231
Manual. SeeIEEE documentation for warnings, 263

=== Page 632 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 599
Index 599
International System of Units (SI), 4 résumés and, 471
Internet. See alsoe-mail; Internet salary negotiations, 491–92
research strategies; Web design; interviews, documenting, 136, 141–42,
Web resources; Web sites; writing 148, 149
for the Web intimidation, and affectation, 23
addresses, 246, 509 intranet, 562
domain names, 460, 465–66 intransitive verbs, 293, 549–50
for mailing newsletters, 345 introductions, 276–81. See also
online forms, 218–23 openings
online postings, 135, 142 conclusions consistent with, 95
primary research on, 459 in correspondence, 109
Internet Public Library, The, 465 for feasibility reports, 188
Internet research strategies, 463–65. for formal reports, 198, 207–9
See alsoelectronic sources full-scale, 280
documenting sources, 134–35, for lists, 309
140–41, 147–48 literature reviews in, 311
evaluating sources, 465–67, 572 for manuals, 280–81
job searches, 289, 486 for newsletter articles, 343
library resources, 461–62 opening strategies, 277–80
online databases and indexes, 461–62 for presentations, 393–94
search engines, 464 for process explanations, 401
subject directories, 465 for progress reports, 402
writer’s checklist for, 464 for proposals, 418, 419, 420, 433
interrogative adverbs, 20 providing context in, 100
interrogative pronouns, 406 for reports, 454
interrogative sentences, 436, 501 revising, 488
interrupting elements, commas with, 79 routine openings, 277
interruptive person, in meetings, 327 setting tone with, 533
interviewing for information, 270–72 for specifications, 280–81
active listening for, 307–9 for trade journal articles, 535–36
choosing interviewees, 270 when to write, 280
compared with questionnaires, for white papers, 566–67
437–38 introductory elements. See also
conducting the interview, 271 sentence openings
expanding interview notes, 272 commas with, 79–80
for job searches, 288 dangling modifiers as, 113
for newsletter articles, 341 eliminating wordy, 92
by phone or e-mail, 272 inverted pyramid organization, 571
preparation, 270–71 inverted sentences
for research, 459, 460 for emphasis, 502
for usability testing, 545 subject-verb agreement in, 25
writer’s checklist for, 271 for variety, 506
interviewing for a job, 272–76 investigative reports, 281–83
application letters, 35–39 sample of, 282
behavior and responses during, invitation for bids (IFB), 413–14, 418,
274–75 420, 456n
behavioral interviews, 274 irregardless, 453
follow-up procedures, 275–76 “is when” and “is where” definitions,
preparation for, 272–74 117

=== Page 633 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 600
600 Index
ISO symbols. SeeInternational judgments, in conclusions, 93, 94
Organization for Standardization justification, in page design, 298
symbols
it key terms
as expletive, 182, 499 defining, 116–17
as subject, 499 for index, 250–51
it / its, 376, 406 repetition of, 168, 453, 537, 538
italics, 283–84 for Web writing, 571
for emphasis, 169, 283, 297–98 keys (legends)
for foreign words, 194, 283 for graphs, 239
for proper names, 284 for maps, 319
for subheadings, 284 for symbols, 194, 556
for titles of works, 283–84, 531 keyword searches
for words, letters, and numbers, for online databases, 461, 462
284 résumé databases and, 487
its / it’s, 284 using abstracts, 535
using search engines, 464
jammed modifiers. Seestacked kind / type / sort, 13–14, 29
(jammed) modifiers kind of / sort of, 28–29, 292
jargon, 285. See alsotechnical know-how, 292
terminology
as affectation, 22 labels
ethics in using, 178 for forms, 223
as functional shift, 224 for visuals, 122, 157, 192, 194, 238,
in global communication, 265, 269 240, 319, 379, 536
as gobbledygook, 233 laboratory reports, 293, 459
in manuals, 317 chronological order for, 68
revising for, 489 sample of, 294–95
stacked modifiers and, 335 vs. test reports, 527
job descriptions, 285–86 lack of reason, 312
sample of, 287 Latin words. See alsoforeign words in
writer’s checklist for, 286 English
job interviews. Seeinterviewing for a common abbreviations for, 160,
job 177
job objective, in résumés, 482 via, 552
job search, 286–91. See also latter / former, 218
employment process lay / lie, 293–95
advertisements, 289–90 layout and design, 295–300. See also
campus career services, 288–89 format; report elements; Web
employment agencies, 290–91 design
informational interviews, 288 analyzing audience needs, 43
networking, 288 for brochures, 54–57
résumés, 471–88 captions, 300
trade and professional listings, 290 color in, 299
Web resources, 289, 291, 486 columns, 299
writing letters of inquiry, 291 consistency in, 489
job titles, 62 context of, 99
journals. Seearticles in periodicals; for e-mail, 163–64, 165
periodicals; trade journal articles ethics in writing and, 178

=== Page 634 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 601
Index 601
for forms, 221, 222–23 letters, 301–6. See alsocorrespondence
headers and footers, 298 body of, 305
headings, 242–44, 298 common styles for, 218, 301, 302–3
for instructions, 260 complimentary closings, 305
justification, 298 continuing pages, 306
for letters, 301–6 end notations, 305–6
lists, 299 for formal contacts, 494
for manuals, 316 headings in, 301–4
for newsletters, 345 inside address, 304
for organization, 361 names and titles in, 304–5
for organizational blogs, 51 openings for, 108, 277
page-design elements, 298–99 salutations, 304–5
for persuasion, 377 samples of, 302–3
for presentation visuals, 396–97 letters (alphabet)
proofreading for, 412 capitalization of, 62
for repurposed content, 456 italics for, 284
for résumés, 472 plurals of, 34
rules, 300 Lexis/Nexis Academic, 461
for technical writing, 522 library research strategies, 460–63. See
typography, 296–98 alsoInternet research strategies;
usability testing for, 545 research
using thumbnails, 300 library homepage, 461
of visuals, 299–300, 556 online catalogs, 461
Web resources for, 300 online databases and indexes,
for white papers, 566 461–62
white space, 299 reference works, 462–63
lectures, documenting, 150. See also lie / lay, 293–95
presentations -like, 517
left-justified (ragged-right) margins, like / as, 306–7
298 limiting adjectives, 13–14, 15–16
legal case titles, 283, 531 line drawings, 155
legal terms line graphs, 235–36, 240, 555
as affectation, 22 linking verbs, 45, 63, 549–50
ethics in using, 178 links
illegal / illicit, 249 in blog writing, 51
party, 374 in Web design, 571–72
quid pro quo, 443 list-hosting service, 345
re, 448 listening, 307–9
legalese, 22, 233 active, 307–9
legends. Seekeys (legends) fallacies about, 307
lend / loan, 300 in interviews, 274
length in meetings, 327
of paragraphs, 368–69 lists, 309–10
of sentence, 505–6 of abbreviations and symbols, 198
less / fewer, 189 in brochures, 56
less / least, 14, 21 climactic order for, 167
letterhead colons for introducing, 75, 76, 309
for correspondence, 301 consistency for, 310
for formal contacts, 494 in correspondence, 110

=== Page 635 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 602
602 Index
lists (continued) magazines. See alsoperiodicals
in document design, 299 documenting articles, 133, 140,
of figures and tables, 197, 419, 557 146
formatting for, 310 visuals in, 299
in instructions, 259 mailing lists, 345
numbered and bulleted, 259, 309, malapropisms, 315
375, 398 male / female, 188
organization names in, 3 management
parallel structure for, 371 activity reports and, 402
in presentations, 310, 398 job description writing, 285–86
stacked, 76 progress reports and, 402
in Web writing, 571 manuals, 315–19. See alsoinstructions
in white papers, 566 actions and responses in, 317–18
writer’s checklist for, 310 audience for, 316
literally / figuratively, 189 chapters and sections in, 317
literature reviews, 310–12 context of, 99
sample of, 311 decimal number heads for, 365
for trade journal articles, 534 introductions for, 280–81
litotes, 190 overview in, 317
loaded arguments, 314 for research, 462
loaded sentences, 502 types of, 315–16
loan / lend, 300 usability of, 543
localisms, 173 verb usage in, 317–18
logic errors, 312–14 warnings in, 181, 319
awkwardness and, 44 writer’s checklist for, 318–19
biased or suppressed evidence, 313 MapQuest, 463
correcting, 363 maps, 319–20
double negatives and, 154 documenting, 141
ethical considerations for, 312, 313 functions of, 554
fact vs. opinion, 183, 313 Web resources for, 320
false cause, 313 writer’s checklist for, 319
lack of reason, 312 margins
loaded arguments, 314 for brochures, 57
mixed constructions, 334 for letters, 301
non sequiturs, 313 in page design, 298
in sentence construction, 504 mass nouns, 25, 33, 349
sweeping generalizations, 312 articles and, 171
long variants, as affectation, 22 ESL tips for, 169–70
Longman Advanced American fewer / less usage and, 189
Dictionary, 125 list of common, 169
Longman American Idioms Dictionary, mathematical equations, 320–22
125 computer technology for, 320–21
Longman Dictionary of American numbering, 321
English, 125 as part of text, 321
loose / lose, 314 positioning displayed, 321–22,
loose sentences, 501, 506–7 537
LSU Libraries Federal Agencies slashes in, 508
Directory, 465 may / can, 59
-ly endings, 21, 245 maybe / may be, 322

=== Page 636 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 603
Index 603
me Metacrawler, 464
between you and . . . , 46, 390 metaphors, 191
my / mine, 376, 406 metasearch engines, 464
mean / average / median, 44 methods of development, 329–32. See
measurements alsospecific methods
abbreviations for, 4 cause-and-effect, 66–67
average / median / mean, 44 chronological, 68
in global communication, 270 clarity and, 68
numbers for, 353 comparison, 85–87
precision of, 11 definition, 117–20
subject-verb agreement with, 25 division-and-classification, 126–29
media / medium, 322–23 general and specific, 227–28
median / mean / average, 44 order-of-importance, 358–61
medical terms, defining, 119 for organization, 361
medium. Seeselecting the medium sequential, 507
meetings, 323–28 spatial, 510
closing, 328 in writing process, xix–xx
conducting, 326–28 metonyms, 191
conflict in, 327 Microsoft Encarta World Atlas, 463
determining attendees, 323 Microsoft Encarta World English
establishing agenda for, 324–25 Dictionary, 124
functions of, 496 Microsoft PowerPoint, 396
location for, 324 mind mapping, 53–54
minutes of, 325, 332–34 minor sentences, 501
planning for, 323–26 minutes of meetings, 332–34
purpose of, 323 assigning responsibility for, 325
from remote locations, 323, 324 chronological order for, 68
for research, 459 sample of, 333
time and duration of, 323–24 writer’s checklist for, 333–34
writer’s checklist for, 328 misplaced modifiers, 32, 335–36
memos, 328–29. See also misplaced participial phrases, 382
correspondence mixed constructions, 334
additional pages for, 329, 331 MLA documentation, 131, 145–52. See
bad-news patterns for, 107–8 alsodocumenting sources
as cover letters, 196, 201, 439 for articles in periodicals, 146, 147
format for, 329 for books, 145–46
functions of, 328, 494–95 compared with other styles,
length of, 493 130–31
methods of development for, 359, 361 documentation models, 145–50
openings for, 108, 277 for electronic sources, 147–48
protocols for sending, 329 in-text citations, 145, 151
samples of, 330–31 for multimedia sources, 148
subject line of, 61, 110, 530 other sources, 149–50
test reports as, 527 sample pages, 151–52
titles for, 530 sample works cited, 152, 217
tone for, 532 Modern Language Association. See
trip reports as, 539 MLA documentation
trouble reports as, 541 modest tone, in correspondence, 105
Web resources for, 329 modified-block-style letter, 301, 303

=== Page 637 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 604
604 Index
modifiers, 334–36. See alsoadjectives; Ms. / Miss / Mrs. usage, 304, 338
adverbs in organizational blogs, 51
ambiguous use of, 32 on title page, 197
awkwardness and, 44 narration, 68, 339–40
dangling, 113 sample of, 340
hyphens with, 245 National Environmental Policy Act
misplaced, 32, 335–36 (NEPA), 174
redundant, 90 National Society of Professional
restrictive and nonrestrictive, 470–71 Engineers (NSPE), 179
sentence construction and, 500 nationalities
squinting, 336 bias toward, 47
stacked (jammed), 15, 16, 335 capitalization of, 60
money, numbers for, 353–54 nature, 341
Monster.com, 289, 486 needless to say, 341
months. See alsodates negative definitions, 116–17, 119–20
capitalization of, 61 negative messages. See alsobad-news
format for writing, 81–82, 115 patterns
mood, 336–38 in correspondence, 105
avoiding shifts in, 551 international correspondence and,
ESL tips for, 337 265
helping verbs and, 550 positive writing and, 386–87
imperative, 317, 337 refusal letters, 449–52
indicative, 337 resignation letters, 467–69
subjunctive, 337–38 negative person, in meetings, 327
more / most negatives, double, 153–54, 386, 453
for comparison, 14, 21, 176–77 neither . . . nor, 96, 346–47
number agreement with, 25 agreement with, 26–27, 29
more than / as much as, 41–42 double negatives and, 154
most / almost, 31 in parallel structure, 371
Ms. / Miss / Mrs., 304, 338 netiquette rules, for e-mail, 163
MSN, 464 networking, for job search, 288
multimedia sources New York Times Index, 462
APA documentation of, 135–36 newsgroups, for research, 459, 463
IEEE documentation of, 141 newsletter articles, 341–43. See also
MLA documentation of, 148 articles in periodicals
multivolume works, documenting, 133, sample of, 342
139, 146 visuals in, 299, 343
musical works titles, 284, 444, 531 writer’s checklist for, 343
mutual / common, 338 newsletters, 343–45
format and design for, 345
names. Seenames and titles; internal blogs as, 50–51
organization names; proper nouns sample of, 344
names and titles types of, 343–45
abbreviations for, 4 typography for, 297
capitalization of, 62 visuals for, 155, 240, 345
commas with, 81–82 newspapers
first name usage, 4, 165, 265, 304 for current information sources, 460
initials, 305, 376 documenting articles, 134, 140, 146
in letters, 304–5 italics for titles, 283, 531

=== Page 638 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 605
Index 605
online databases and indexes for, mass, 25, 33, 169–70, 349
462 as objects, 356
no, commas with, 78 phrases as, 380, 383
no one / not one, 346 plurals of, 65, 350–51, 387–88
nominalizations, 346 possessive case of, 62–63, 64–65,
nominative case, 63 387–88, 547
non sequiturs, 313 pronouns modifying, 408–9
none, 346 proper, 59–60, 349
nonfinite verbs, 550 as subject, 499–500
nonflammable / flammable / types of, 349
inflammable, 192 verbals as, 546–47, 550
nonrestrictive elements, 470–71. See Nucleonics Week, 533
alsoparenthetical elements number (grammar), 351–52. See also
commas with, 78–79, 470 agreement
using which with, 471, 527 indefinite pronouns and, 25, 409
nonstandard English, 173–74, 545 pronoun-antecedent agreement, 24,
nor / or, 346–47 28–29
with compound subjects, 26–27, 29 subject-verb agreement, 24–26, 409,
not 499, 550, 551
double negatives and, 153 number (word)
in verb phrases, 383 number / amount usage, 33
not only . . . but also, 96, 371 subject-verb agreement with, 25–26
note-taking, 347–48 number-style method of
in active listening, 308–9 documentation, 130. See also
draft writing and, 569 IEEE documentation
for interviews, 271, 272 numbered lists, 110, 309, 310. See also
meeting minutes, 325, 332–34 lists
methods for, 348 for inquiries, 254
outlining and, 363–64 in instructions, 259
paraphrasing, 372 periods in, 375
plagiarism and, 347 numbering
for presentations, 400 decimal headings, 243–44, 364–65
quotations and, 445 in documents, 355
for research, 459, 460 of equations, 321
writer’s checklist for, 348 for figures and tables, 197, 355, 379,
notes section, in formal reports, 199 519
noun phrases, 39 in outlines, 364–65
nouns, 349–51 numbers, 352–55. See also
abstract, 349 measurements
as adjectives, 16, 350, 388, 517 in addresses, 354–55
collective, 26, 349, 350 adjectives as, 14
common, 60, 349 colons with, 76
concrete, 349 commas with, 81–82, 354
coordinate, 388 dates, 354
count, 14, 25, 33, 169–70, 349 in documents, 355
for electronic résumés, 487 ESL tips for, 354
ESL tips for, 169–70 fractions, 353
functions of, 349–50 hyphens with spelled-out, 116, 245
gender and, 226 italics for, 284

=== Page 639 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 606
606 Index
numbers (continued) omnibus words, 546
mathematical equations, 320–22 on / onto / upon, 357
measurements, 353 one, 357
money, 353–54 subject-verb agreement with, 24
numerals vs. words, 14, 352–53 one another, 407
ordinal, 14, 191 one of those . . . who, 357–58
in parentheses, 355, 373 online databases. Seedatabases, online
percentages, 353, 374 online forms, 220–21
periods with, 354, 375, 376 online postings
plurals of, 34, 353 documenting, 135, 142, 148
slashes with, 508 subject lines of, 530
time, 354 online resources. Seeelectronic sources;
numerical data Internet research strategies
in appendixes, 35 online social communities, 289
in graphs, 235–40, 554–55 online surveys, 438
sources for, 463 only, 21, 358
in tables, 519, 554 open-ended questions, 221
openings. See alsointroductions
object of preposition, 356, 390 for application letters, 35–38
gerunds as, 546 for bad-news letters, 106
nouns as, 350 for correspondence, 108–9
pronoun case and, 64 good news in, 108
punctuation of, 76 for international correspondence,
objective case, 63, 64, 407, 408 265–69
objective complements, 89, 350 for investigative reports, 283
objectives for presentations, 393–94
opening with, 277 providing context in, 35, 100
in résumés, 482 for refusal letters, 451
objects, 356. See alsodirect objects; routine, 277
indirect objects; object of for test reports, 527
preposition OpenOffice.org Impress, 396
observation, direct, in research, 459, operators’ manuals, 316
460 opinions
Occupational Outlook Handbook, 291 ESL tips for stating, 386
of vs. facts, 183, 313
with demonstrative adjectives, 13, point of view for, 386
28–29 or / nor, 346–47
possessive case using, 387, 388 for compound subjects, 26–27, 29
redundant use of, 256, 365, 391 oral presentations. Seepresentations
of which / who’s / whose, 568 order-of-importance method of
OK / okay, 356 development, 66, 184, 331–32,
omissions 358–61
apostrophes for, 34 ordinal numbers, 191
commas for, 81 as modifiers, 14
dashes for, 114 spelling out, 352–53
ellipses for, 161, 375, 446 organization, 361–62. See alsomethods
ethics in writing and, 178 of development
slashes for, 508 awkwardness and, 44
in telegraphic writing, 522 coherence and, 71–72

=== Page 640 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 607
Index 607
outlining, 362–65 ownership. Seepossessive case
paragraph length and, 368 Oxford American Wordpower
for presentations, 393–95 Dictionary for Learners of
for résumés, 471–72, 481–85 English, 125
for trade journal articles, 535 Oxford English Dictionary,The, 124
in writing process, xix–xx, xxiii
organization names pace, 367
abbreviations of, 3–4 clarity and, 68–70
ampersands in, 4, 33 inserting clauses or phrases for, 250,
capitalization of, 61 506
in salutations, 304 nominalizations for slowing, 346
as singular nouns, 350 in presentations, 400
on title page, 197, 419 Pace University Library Internet
on Web sites, 563 Resources, 465
organizational blogs, 49–52 page design. Seelayout and design
organizational charts, 362, 555 page numbers
organizational newsletters, 343–44 in formal reports, 197
organizational sales pitch, in proposals, in headers or footers, 241, 298
421, 431 number usage for, 354, 355
origins, definitions exploring, 119 painting titles, 284, 531
orphans, 299 pamphlets
our / ours, 376, 406 documenting, 136, 142, 149
outlining, 362–65 italics for titles, 283, 531
abstracts and, 8–9 panels, brochure, 55–56
advantages of, 363 paragraphs, 367–70
brainstorming and, 53 in e-mail, 164
clarity and, 68 functions of, 367
for coherence, 72, 363, 566 length of, 368–69
decimal headings in, 244 outlining, 363, 369
digital tips for, 365 topic sentence of, 38, 368
draft writing and, 363, 365, 569 transitional, 537, 539
including visuals, 154, 361–62, 364, transitions between, 72, 538–39
556 unity and coherence in, 370, 488,
method of development for, 332 543
for organization, 361–62, 363 writing, 369–70
parallel structure for, 364 parallel structure, 370–72, 515
steps for creating, 363–65 in abstracts, 9
for trade journal articles, 535 for both . . . andusage, 52
transitions and, 539 faulty parallelism, 371–72
types of, 363 for garbled sentences, 225
unity and, 543 for headings, 244
writing paragraphs and, 363, 369 in lists, 310
in writing process, xx for nonsexist language, 47
outside [of], 365 in outlining, 364
over [with], 366 in sentence construction, 502
overhead transparencies, 396 paraphrasing, 372
overview in active listening, 308
in manuals, 317 documenting sources and, 130,
in presentations, 393 383–84

=== Page 641 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 608
608 Index
paraphrasing (continued) perfect participles, 548
ethical considerations for, 372 perfect tense, 524
indirect quotations as, 443 periodic sentences, 501, 507
in meeting minutes, 332 periodical indexes, 7, 461–62
note-taking and, 347 periodicals. See alsoarticles in
parentheses, 373 periodicals; trade journal articles
brackets within, 52 abstracts in, 7
commas with, 82 for current information sources, 460
for enclosing elements, 114, 498 documenting, 133–34, 140, 146
in equations, 322 italics for titles, 283, 444, 531
numbers in, 355, 373 periods, 83, 375–76
periods with, 373, 375 for abbreviations, 3, 4
parenthetical citations. Seecitations with ellipses, 161
parenthetical elements with numbers, 354, 375, 376
brackets for, 52, 373 with parentheses, 373, 375
capitalization of, 62 period faults, 376
commas with, 78–79, 470 with quotation marks, 375, 444
dashes for, 114, 498 for run-on sentences, 376
nonrestrictive elements as, 470–71 permissions, for copyrighted material,
parentheses for, 373, 498 101
for sentence variety, 506 person, 376, 406. See alsopoint of
part-by-part method of comparison, view
85, 86 agreement of, 24, 550, 551
participial phrases, 381–82 in narratives, 339
dangling and misplaced, 382 point of view and, 385–86
participles, 548, 550 pronouns and, 409
ESL tips for, 15 person / party, 374
parts of speech, 374. See alsospecific personal communications,
parts of speech documenting, 136, 142, 149
in dictionaries, 123 personal experience, opening with, 393
party, 374 personal pronouns, 406
passive voice, 552, 557, 559–60 antecedents and, 409
avoiding responsibility with, 178, forms of, 376
559 point of view and, 385–86
awkwardness and, 44 personification, 191
ethics in writing for, 559 persuasion, 377
infinitives and, 547 in application letters, 35
in laboratory reports, 293 ethics in writing for, 377
in technical writing, 522 in inquiry letters, 253
wordiness of, 92, 558–59 in openings, 109, 280
past participles, 15, 548 in presentations, 394
past perfect tense, 524 in proposals, 412, 417
past progressive tense, 524, 526 in résumés, 472
past tense, 172, 524 sample memo, 378
PDF files. SeeAdobe PDF files in white papers, 565
per, 374 “you” viewpoint and, 575
percent / percentage, 374 phenomenon / phenomena, 377
percentages, numbers in, 353 photographs, 377–80. See alsovisuals
perfect / equal / unique, 176–77 vs. drawings, 154, 377–79

=== Page 642 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 609
Index 609
functions of, 554 polite tone
in trade journal articles, 537 in correspondence, 105
phrases in global communication,
commas with, 78–79 265–69
functions of, 380 political divisions (capitalizing), 60
gerund, 383 portfolios, in résumés, 485
infinitive, 382–83 position, and emphasis, 167
noun, 383 positive writing, 386–87, 515. See also
participial, 381–82 goodwill, establishing
prepositional, 380–81 for defining terms, 116–17
restrictive and nonrestrictive, 470–71 for double negatives, 154
verb, 383 ethics in writing for, 386
pictorial symbols, in flowcharts, 192, “you” viewpoint, 575
193 possessive adjectives, 14
picture graphs, 239, 240, 555 count nouns and, 170
pie graphs, 238–39, 240, 555 possessive case, 387–89
place names, 60–61 apostrophes for, 34, 387–88
plagiarism, 383–84 for compound words, 90
documenting sources and, 102, ESL tips for, 407
130 of nouns, 62–63, 64–65, 387–88
ethics in writing and, 179 of pronouns, 63, 64–65, 387,
note-taking and, 347 388–89, 407, 408
quotations and, 443 post hoc, ergo propter hoc, 313
repurposing and, 456 postal service abbreviations, 5, 301
Web resources for, 384 practicing, for presentations, 398–99,
plain-language laws, 176 400
plain-text résumés, 487 precision / accuracy, 11
planning, in collaborative writing, 73. predicate adjectives, 16
See alsooutlining; preparation predicate nominative, 500
play titles, 61, 95, 284, 531 predicates, 500
pluperfect, 524 complements in, 88–89
plurals. See alsonumber (grammar) predictions, in conclusions, 94
for abbreviations, 3, 34 preface, in formal reports, 198
apostrophes for, 34 prefixes, 246, 389
compound words, 90, 351 preparation, 389–90
for foreign words, 195 analyzing audience needs, 42–43
nouns, 65, 350–51 determining purpose, 435
of numbers, 34, 353 determining scope, 493
possessive case of, 387–88 for research, 459
podcasts, documenting, 135, 148 for specifications, 510
poem titles, 284, 531 writer’s checklist for, 389–90
point of view, 385–86. See alsoperson; in writing process, xvi–xviii, xxiii
“you” viewpoint prepositional idioms, 248
consistent use of, 70, 370 prepositional phrases, 356, 380–81,
for correspondence, 104–5 390
in narratives, 339 commas with, 83
one usage, 357 overuse of, 381
person and, 376 passive voice and, 558
“you” viewpoint, 575–76 showing possession, 387

=== Page 643 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 610
610 Index
prepositions, 380, 390–91. See also organization for, 507
object of preposition sample of, 522
confused with adverbs, 390 product description, in proposals, 420,
at end of sentence, 390–91 425
errors with, 391 professional journals, job listings in,
number agreement with, 13, 28–29 290. See alsotrade journal articles
in titles of works, 61, 391, 530 prognosis / diagnosis, 122
present participle, 15, 548 progress and activity reports, 402–4
present perfect tense, 524, 525 samples of, 403–4
ESL tips for, 172 titles for, 530
infinitives and, 547 progressive tense, 524
present progressive tense, 524 ESL tips for, 172, 526
ESL tips for, 172, 526 project description, in requests for
present tense, 172, 525 proposals, 457
infinitives and, 547 project management, for proposals,
for instructions, 259 414
presentations, 391–401 projection, in presentations, 400
analyzing audience for, 392 promotional writing
body of, 394 newsletters, 344–45
closings, 394–95 white papers, 565–67
delivery techniques for, 398–400 pronoun-antecedent agreement, 24,
direct address in, 126 27–29. See alsoagreement
eye contact during, 399, 400 with compound antecedents, 29
gathering information for, 392–93 in gender, 27–28, 226, 409
introductions, 279, 393–94 in number, 28–29
methods of development for, 332, pronoun references, 32, 405, 453. See
358, 361 alsoantecedents
practicing, 398–99, 400 pronouns, 405–9. See alsocase;
presentation anxiety, 400 indefinite pronouns; personal
purpose of, 392 pronouns; pronoun-antecedent
software for, 396–97 agreement; relative pronouns
structuring, 393–95 as adjectives, 14
transitions in, 395 case of, 62–66, 407–9
typography for, 297, 398 in compound subjects, 65–66, 408
using lists in, 310, 398 demonstrative, 406
visuals for, 155, 240, 395–98 eliminating in telegraphic style, 522
writer’s checklist for, 398, 400–401 gender and, 27–28, 226, 409
pretentious language. Seeaffectation indefinite, 388–89, 406
primary research, 459–60 intensive, 407
principal / principle, 401 interrogative, 406
privacy statements, in Web design, 563, number and, 28–29, 409
573 objective case of, 64
problem statement person and, 376, 406, 409, 551
opening with, 277, 393, 535, plurals of, 351
566–67 point of view and, 385–86
in proposals, 413, 420 possessive, 64–65, 387, 388–89, 547
process explanations, 401 reciprocal, 407
flowcharts for, 192–93, 555 reflexive, 406–7
instructions, 258–63 relative, 406

=== Page 644 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 611
Index 611
sexist language and, 27–28, 47, 226, titles for, 529–30
241, 409 writer’s checklist for, 417
as subject, 499 ProQuest, 461
subjective case of, 63–64 protocols, 544
for transitions, 537, 538 pseudo- / quasi-, 434
pronunciations, in dictionaries, 123 public domain works, 102, 456
proofreader’s marks, 410 publication dates. See alsodates
proofreading, 411–12 in headers or footers, 241, 298
application letters, 39 for reports, 197
blog entries, 52 punctuation, 434
e-mail, 162 apostrophes, 34
for format consistency, 412 brackets, 52
for spelling, 411, 512 colons, 75–76
for typographical errors, 489 commas, 77–83
writer’s checklist for, 411 dashes, 114
proper nouns, 349 ellipses, 161
capitalization of, 59–60 exclamation marks, 180–81
italics for, 284 for global communication, 232
proposal description, in requests for hyphens, 245–47
proposals, 457 parentheses, 373
proposal-evaluation criteria, in requests periods, 375–76
for proposals, 458 question marks, 436–37
proposals, 412–33 quotation marks, 443–45
appendixes for, 34–35 semicolons, 497–98
audience and purpose for, 413 slashes, 508–9
collaborative writing of, 72 Web resources for, 434
conclusions, 93–95 purpose, 435
context in, 98–99 in abstracts, 7, 8
cover letters for, 100, 111 active listening and, 308
environmental impact statements, of brochures, 54–55
174–76 clarity and, 68
executive summaries in, 181 design and, 296
external, 414 for feasibility reports, 187
formal structure for, 418–19 front matter for defining, 196
grant and research, 421–33 in introduction, 280, 535
informal structure for, 418 of manuals, 317
internal, 414 of meetings, 323
length of, 493 needs of audience and, 42, 448
as memos, 329 in preparation stage, 389
methods of development for, for presentations, 392
331–32, 510 for proposals, 413
persuasive writing for, 412, 417 repurposing, 455–56
project management for, 414 for requests for proposals, 457
requests for proposals, 456–58 scope and, 493
routine, 414 selecting the medium and, 494
sales, 420–21 style and, 513
samples of, 415–17, 422–32 in titles, 529
solicited and unsolicited, 413–14 tone and, 532
special-purpose, 414, 415–17 unity and, 543

=== Page 645 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 612
612 Index
purpose (continued) capitalization of first word of, 60,
usability testing and, 545 445
for visuals, 553 colons with, 76, 444, 445
in Web design, 561–62 commas with, 80, 83, 375, 444, 445
word choice and, 6 direct, 443, 445
in writing process, xvi documenting, 130, 445
ellipses for omissions, 161, 446
qualifications summary ethics in writing for, 443, 445
in proposals, 433 with exclamation marks, 181
in résumés, 483 incorporating into text, 446–47
quasi- / pseudo-, 434 indirect, 445
question marks, 83, 436–37 inserting words into, 52, 446
questionnaires, 437–43 in note-taking, 347, 348, 459
advantages and disadvantages of, opening with, 279, 393
437–38 paraphrasing, 372, 383–84
biased evidence and, 313 parenthetical citations following,
form design for, 218–23 132, 139, 145
preparing questions, 438–42 periods in, 375, 444
for research, 459 plagiarism and, 383–84, 445
sample of, 439–41 question marks with, 437
selecting recipients for, 438 within quotations, 443
Web resources for, 438 semicolons with, 444, 498
writer’s checklist for, 442–43 using sic, 52, 446
questions
adverbs asking, 20 racial groups
for forms, 221 bias toward, 47
frequently asked (FAQs), 183–85 capitalization of, 60
in inquiry letters, 254 radio programs
for interviewing for information, 271 documenting, 136, 148
job interview, 272–73 titles of, 444, 531
pronouns asking, 406 raise / rise, 448
punctuation for indirect, 436 rambling person, in meetings, 327
punctuation for polite requests, 436 rambling sentences, 503–4
for research, 460 Random House Webster’s College
rhetorical, 393, 490 Dictionary, 124
as transitions, 537, 539 re, 448
verb phrases and, 383 reactor, in listening, 308
word order for, 502 readers, 448. See alsoaudience
for writing trade journal article, 534 Readers’ Guide to Periodical
quid pro quo, 443 Literature, 461–62
quiet person, in meetings, 327 really, 448
quotation marks, 443–45 reason is [because], 448
for direct quotations, 443, 445 reasoning errors. Seelogic errors
punctuation with, 444–45, 498 reciprocal pronouns, 407
for titles of works, 284, 444, 531 recommendation letters, 449
for words and phrases, 444 recommendation reports, 186, 283
quotations, 445–47 recommendations
block, 132, 447 in abstracts, 7, 8
in blog writing, 51 in conclusions, 93, 94

=== Page 646 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 613
Index 613
in cover letters, 419 report elements. See alsolayout and
in feasibility reports, 188 design
lists for, 299 abstracts, 7–9, 197, 203
opening with summary of, 278 appendixes, 34–35, 199
in reports, 199, 215–16, 455 back matter, 199–200
in test reports, 527 bibliographies, 48–49, 199
redundancy, 90, 92. See alsorepetition body, 198–99, 210–14, 454
eliminating, 448 conclusions, 93–95, 199, 215–16,
oneusage as, 357 455
with prepositions, 256, 365–66, 391, cover letters, 111, 196, 201
543 executive summaries, 181, 198,
refer / allude / elude, 30 205–6
reference letters, 449 explanatory notes, 199
ethics in writing for, 449 foreword, 198
sample of, 450 front matter, 196–98
reference works, 462–63 glossaries, 200, 233
references headers and footers, 241–42, 298
avoiding above, 6 headings, 242–44, 298
in résumés, 485 index, 200
references list (APA), 48, 130. See also introductions, 198, 207–9, 276–81,
APA documentation; documenting 454
sources list of abbreviations and symbols,
documentation models, 132–36 198
in formal reports, 199 list of figures and tables, 197
sample page, 138 page numbers, 197
reflexive pronouns, 406–7 preface, 198
refusal letters, 449–52 problem statement, 277
bad-news patterns for, 106–7 recommendations, 199, 215–16, 455
employment, 9–11 references / works-cited list, 199,
samples of, 10, 451 217
regarding / with regard to, 453 routine openings, 276, 277
regardless, 453 sample report, 200–217
relative adjectives, 91 table of contents, 197, 204, 218, 519
relative pronouns, 406 text, 198
in adjective clauses, 171 title page, 197, 202
for combining ideas, 517 titles, 529–30, 531
for connecting clauses, 71 visuals, 299–300, 379
in sentence fragments, 504 reports, 454–55. See alsoreport
subject-verb agreement with, 25, 26 elements
wordiness and, 91 documenting, 136, 142, 149
religious groups feasibility reports, 185–88
bias toward, 47 formal reports, 195–217
capitalization of, 60 investigative reports, 281–83
repetition, 453–54 laboratory reports, 293
awkwardness and, 44 as memos, 329
dashes before, 114 methods of development for, 361
for emphasis, 168, 453 point of view in, 386
for transitions, 453, 537 progress and activity reports, 402–4
wordiness from, 90, 92 test reports, 527

=== Page 647 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 614
614 Index
reports (continued) responses
tone for, 533 to e-mail, 163, 164
trip reports, 539–40 in form design, 221
trouble reports, 541–42 indicating, in manuals, 318
types of, 454 to inquiries, 255
repurposing, 455–56 in job interviews, 275
boilerplate material, 102 responsibility
for context, 455 ethics in writing and, 178, 179,
ethics in writing for, 456 559
for medium, 456 statement of, in proposals, 421,
requests for proposals (RFP), 413–14, 430
420, 456–58 restrictive and nonrestrictive elements,
ethics in writing for, 458 470–71. See alsoparenthetical
format for, 413–14, 418 elements
government specifications in, 512 résumés, 471–88
Web resources for, 458 analyzing background for, 481
research, 459–67. See alsoInternet in appendixes, 35
research strategies; library application letters and, 35, 471
research strategies electronic, 480, 486–88
for collaborative writing, 73 e-mail attached, 487–88
direct observation, 459, 460 ethics in writing for, 472
ethical considerations for, 460 organization for, 481–85
evaluating sources, 465–67 posting online, 289
Internet research strategies, 463–65 for returning job seekers, 485–86
interviews, 270–72 salary negotiations and, 485, 491
for job interviews, 273 samples of, 472–81
laboratory reports, 293 scannable and plain-text, 487
library research strategies, 460–63 Web resources for, 481
literature reviews, 310–12, 534 reviewing. See alsorevision
for newsletters, 341–42, 345 for biased language, 46
note-taking for, 347–48 in collaborative writing, 73–74
for presentations, 392–93 e-mail, 162
primary, 459–60 literature reviews, 310–12
questionnaires for, 437–43 manuals, 319
reference works for, 462–63 revision, 488–89. See alsoreviewing
secondary, 460 achieving conciseness, 91–92
for specifications, 510 for coherence, 72
for trade journal articles, 534–35 in collaborative writing, 74
in writing process, xviii–xix, xxiii proofreading and, 411
research methods, in abstracts, 7, 8 for sentence construction, 489, 507
research plan, in proposals, 433 for transitions, 488, 539
research proposals, 421–33 writer’s checklist for, 488–89
resignation letters, 467–69 in writing process, xxi–xxii,
samples of, 468, 469 xxiii–xxiv
respectful tone, in correspondence, 105 RFP. Seerequests for proposals (RFP)
respective / respectively, 469–70 rhetorical questions, 490
responder, in listening, 308 opening with, 393, 490
response letters. Seeinquiries and as titles, 490, 530
responses rise / raise, 448

=== Page 648 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 615
Index 615
routine proposals, 414 in introduction, 188, 277–78, 280,
rules 535
in page design, 300 in literature reviews, 311–12
in tables, 520 in preparation stage, 389–90
run-on sentences, 376, 490 of test reports, 527
in titles, 529
-s endings for white papers, 566
for noun plurals, 350, 387–88 in writing process, xviii
for plural numbers, 353 Scope of Work section, in requests for
for verbs, 351, 551 proposals, 457
salary negotiations, 491–93 screen names, 256
benefits and job perks, 492–93 screening (shading)
job interviews and, 275, 491–92 in graphs, 236, 238
résumés and, 485, 491 in maps, 319
Web resources for, 492 in page design, 299
sales brochures, 54–57 sculpture titles, 284, 531
sales proposals, 420–21 search engines, 463–65
conclusions for, 94 second pages. Seecontinuing pages
ethics in writing for, 420 second person, 376
sample of, 422–32 antecedents and, 409
structure for, 420–21 point of view, 385
using repurposed content for, 455 secondary research, 460
Web resources for, 421 sections. Seechapters and sections
salutations selecting the medium, 494–97
capitalization in, 60 context and, 99
colons in, 75 factors involved in, 494
commas in, 82 for repurposed content, 456
for e-mail, 164–65 scope and, 493
first name usage, 165, 265, 304 in writing process, xviii
for international correspondence, -self / -selves, 406
165, 265 semi- / bi-, 46
for letters, 304–5 semicolons, 497–98
for unknown gender, 304 for comma splices, 77
sans serif typeface, 297, 563, 572 in compound sentences, 500
scarcely, 153 with conjunctive adverbs, 20, 82
schedules for items in series, 80, 82
chronological order for, 68 for linking independent clauses, 497
for collaborative writing, 73 in long sentences, 498
delivery, in proposals, 421, 427 with quotation marks, 444, 498
delivery, in requests for proposals, for run-on sentences, 376, 490
457 with strong connectives, 497
for research proposals, 433 sentence construction, 498–502. See
schematic diagrams, 155, 158 alsosentence types
scholarly abbreviations, 4–5 for abstracts, 9
scientific names, 61 avoiding loaded sentences, 502
scope, 493 awkwardness and, 44
in abstracts, 7 capitalization of first word, 60
in environmental impact statements, clauses, 70–71
174–75 comma splices, 77

=== Page 649 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 616
616 Index
sentence construction (continued) compound, 70, 500
emphasis and, 167–68 compound-complex, 501
ESL tips for, 499, 502 declarative, 501
in formal style, 513 emphasis and, 168
garbled sentences, 225 exclamatory, 501
for global communication, 269 imperative, 501
guidelines for effective, 501–2 interrogative, 501
intention in, 501 loose, 501, 506–7
mixed constructions, 334 minor, 501
period faults, 376 periodic, 501, 507
predicates, 500 simple, 70, 500
revising, 489, 507 sentence variety, 505–7. See also
run-on sentences, 376, 490 sentence types
sentence faults, 503–4 for formal writing, 513–14
sentence fragments, 504–5 for garbled sentences, 225
sentence structures, 500–501 length of sentence, 505–6
sentence variety, 505–7 loose and periodic sentences for,
stylistic use in, 501 506–7
subject-verb-object pattern, 499, subordination for, 505, 506, 507,
501–2, 518 516
subjects, 499–500 using parenthetical elements, 506
sentence endings word order, 506
ESL tips for, 502 sentence word order. Seeinverted
with lists, 310 sentences; word order
within parentheses, 373, 375 sentences, transitions between, 538
prepositions, 390–91 sequential method of development, 68,
punctuation for, 180–81, 375, 436 332, 507
sentence faults, 503–4 in flowcharts, 192
faulty logic, 504 in instructions, 259–60
faulty subordination, 503 lists for, 299
missing subjects, 503 in narratives, 339
missing verbs, 504 series of items
rambling sentences, 503–4 commas with, 80–81, 83
run-on sentences, 490 etc. with, 177
sentence fragments, 70, 503, 504–5 parallel structure for, 372
with participles, 548 question marks with, 436
period faults, 376 semicolons with, 80, 82, 498
rewriting, 505 serif typeface, 297
sentence length, and emphasis, 167 service, 507
sentence openings. See also service manuals, 316
introductory elements set / sit, 508
avoiding also, 31 sexist language, 46–47. See alsobiased
commas with, 79–80 language
conjunctions as, 95 female / male usage, 188
dangling modifiers, 113 imperative mood for, 241
ESL tips for, 502 Ms. / Miss / Mrs. usage, 304, 338
with numbers, 352 occupational descriptions, 47
sentence outlines, 363 pronoun usage, 27–28, 47, 226, 241,
sentence types 409
complex, 501 unparallel terms, 47

=== Page 650 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 617
Index 617
shall / will, 508, 525 for letters, 301
she / he, 241 in Web design, 563
gender agreement with, 27, 226 white space, 299
sexist language and, 27, 47, 226, spam, e-mail, 163
241, 409 spatial method of development, 332,
she / her / hers, 376, 406 510
ship names, 284 sample of, 511
short story titles, 444 spatial relationships, visuals depicting,
sic, 5, 52, 446 554
sight / site / cite, 68 special-purpose manuals, 316
signature blocks, e-mail, 165 special-purpose proposals, 414, 415–17
signatures specific-to-general method of
for letters, 305 development, 228, 331
for memos, 329 specifications, 510–12
similes, 191 decimal number heads for, 243–44
simple sentences, 70, 168, 500 government, 512
since / as / because, 41 industrial, 510–12
single-source publishing, 455n introductions for, 280–81
sit / set, 508 speeches, documenting, 150. See also
site / cite / sight, 68 presentations
site preparation, in proposals, 421, 428 spelled-out words, hyphens for, 246
skills and abilities section, of résumé, spelling, 512
484–85 dictionaries for, 123
slang proofreading for, 411, 512
as nonstandard English, 173–74 spell checkers, 489, 512
quotation marks for, 444 split infinitives, 547–48
slashes, 508–9 squinting modifiers, 336
slides, for presentations, 396–97 stacked (jammed) modifiers, 335
so / so that / such, 509 as gobbledygook, 233
Society for Technical Communication, order for, 15
533 series of nouns as, 16
software, for presentations. See also staffing, in proposals, 421
computer technology; Digital Tips standard English, 173, 513, 545
solicited proposals, 413–14 standardized symbols, 192–94
some / somewhat, 509 statistics. Seenumerical data
some time / sometime / sometimes, 510 status reports, 402
sort / kind / type, 13–14, 29 Stedman’s Medical Dictionary, 125
sort of, 292 steps. Seesequential method of
source lines, for visuals, 239, 520, 556 development
sources, citing. Seedocumenting stereotypes. Seebiased language; sexist
sources language
sources of information. See also strata / stratum, 513
research stubs, in tables, 520
evaluating, 465–67 style, 513–16. See alsotechnical writing
in proposals, 412 style; writing style
for research, 459–60 formal writing, 513–14
in writing process, xix informal writing, 514–15
spacing for trade journal articles, 536–37
for brochures, 57 Web resources for, 515
for forms, 223 writer’s checklist for, 515

=== Page 651 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 618
618 Index
style manuals, 3, 131, 153, 515, 545 subordinate clauses, 70. See also
Stylebook and Briefing on Media Law dependent clauses
(Associated Press), 515 subordinating conjunctions
stylistic use, in sentence construction, for connecting clauses, 71, 96
501 list of common, 96
subheadings, 284. See alsoheadings in sentence fragments, 504
subject (of document), introducing, 280 for subordination, 516
subject (of sentence), 499–500. See also subordination, 516–17
subject-verb agreement in abstracts, 9
active voice for highlighting, 558 avoiding overlapping, 517
compound, 500 awkwardness and, 44
ESL tips for, 499, 502 clarity and, 68
gerunds as, 546 for comma splices, 77
nouns as, 349 for conciseness, 91
position of, 499 effective use of, 70
problems with missing, 503, 504 faulty, 503
subject dictionaries, 125 in formal writing, 514
subject directories, 465 for garbled sentences, 225
subject lines for loaded sentences, 502
capitalization in, 61, 110 for run-on sentences, 490
for e-mail and memos, 110, 163, 530 for sentence variety, 505, 506, 507,
for test reports, 527 516
for trip reports, 539 vs. using parentheses, 373
for trouble reports, 541 subscription newsletters, 344–45
subject-verb agreement, 24–27, 499, substantives, 500
551. See alsoagreement such / so / so that, 509
abstract nouns and, 26 such as, in sentence fragments, 505
with collective nouns, 26, 350 suffixes, 246, 517
compound subjects and, 26–27 summaries
indefinite pronouns and, 25, 409 career, 483
with intervening words and phrases, in conclusions, 93, 94
24, 25 executive, 181
inverted word order and, 25 meeting minutes, 332
with measurement subjects, 25 for note-taking, 445
relative pronouns and, 25, 26 opening with, 278
special problem words, 26 for transitions, 537
subjective complements and, 25 summarizing statements, dashes before,
titles of works and, 26 114
with word number, 25–26 summary list, in manuals, 316
subject-verb-object pattern, 499, superlative form
501–2, 518 of adjectives, 14
subjective case, 63–64, 407–8 of adverbs, 20–21
subjective complements, 89 supplement / augment, 43
adjectives as, 15 surveys. See alsoquestionnaires
gerunds as, 546 in investigative reports, 283
nouns as, 350 online, 438
pronouns as, 63–64 questionnaires, 437–43
subject-verb agreement with, 25 for research, 459
subjunctive mood, 337–38 for usability testing, 545

=== Page 652 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 619
Index 619
sweeping generalizations, 312 in manuals, 316, 317
symbols in proposals, 413
in flowcharts, 192–94 in white papers, 566
functions of, 555 word choice and, 569
for global communication, 230, 231 technical writing style, 513, 521–22.
for graphs, 239, 240 See alsoIEEE documentation;
in instructions, 263 style; writing style
keys for, 556 active voice for, 557–58
list of, in reports, 198 ethics in writing and, 178–79, 521
for manuals, 318, 319 exposition for, 182
proofreader’s marks, 410 teleconferences, 495–96
in tables, 519 telegraphic style, 522–23
synonyms, 518 caution with, 91, 104
coordinated, 91 eliminating articles, 41
for defining terms, 116 in instructions, 259
in dictionaries, 123, 518 telephone calls, 495–96
in thesaurus, 529 interviewing for information by, 272
word choice and, 569 television programs
vs. word repetition, 453–54 documenting, 136, 141, 148
syntax, 518 titles of, 283, 444, 531
templates
tables, 519–21. See alsovisuals for letters, 301
for comparisons, 85, 87 for style and format, 200
elements of, 519–21 “Ten Tips on Writing White Papers”
functions of, 554 (Barefoot), 565
vs. graphs, 235, 239, 519 tenant / tenet, 523
informal, 521 tense, 523–26, 551
list of, 197, 557 avoiding shifts in, 526, 551
numbering, 197, 355, 519 ESL tips for, 172, 526
screening (shading) in, 299 helping verbs and, 550
for trade journal articles, 536 for infinitives, 547
tables of contents, 519 in narratives, 339
decimal headings in, 244 present perfect, 172
for FAQs, 184 present progressive, 172
in formal reports, 196, 197, 204, 218 territorial person, in meetings, 327
parallel structure for, 371 test reports, 293, 459, 527
placement of, 519 sample of, 528
in proposals, 419 testing. Seeusability testing
for white papers, 566 text, in formal reports, 198
team writing. Seecollaborative writing than / as, and pronoun case, 64, 65
Technical Communication, 533 that
technical manuals. Seemanuals dual function of, 406
technical terminology with indirect quotations, 443, 445
affectation and, 22 one of those . . . , 357–58
audience and, 522 for restrictive clauses, 471
defining for readers, 175, 281 that / those
in glossaries, 233 as demonstrative adjectives, 13, 406
in instructions, 259, 263 number agreement with, 13, 25, 26,
jargon, 285 28

=== Page 653 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 620
620 Index
that / where, 564 special cases, 532
that / which / who, 26, 527–29 subject-verb agreement with, 26
the, 13, 41 to
there, as expletive, 182, 499, 529 in prepositional phrases, 382
there / their / they’re, 529 as sign of infinitive, 382, 547–48,
thesaurus, 518, 529 550
they / them / their / theirs, 376, 406 to / too / two, 532
third person, 376 tone, 532–33
antecedents and, 409 in abstracts, 7
in narratives, 339 for adjustment letters, 16
point of view, 385 building goodwill with, 104–5
this / these for complaint letters, 87
as demonstrative adjectives, 13, 406 context and, 99
number agreement with, 13, 28–29 for correspondence, 104–5
pronoun references with, 405 for newsletters, 341, 345
thought-provoking statement, in for refusal letters, 451
conclusions, 95 style and, 513
thumbnails, in page design, 300 in technical writing, 521
time of titles, 529, 533
in global communication, 269, 270 for trouble reports, 542
numbers for, 354 “you” viewpoint, 575
time periods, capitalization of, 61 topic outlines, 363, 369
title page topic sentences, 38, 368
in formal reports, 196–97, 202 in abstracts, 8
in proposals, 419 paragraph unity and, 370
titles, 529–32. See alsonames and placement of, 368
titles; titles of works and topics
documents in headers or footers, 241, 298
titles of works and documents, 529–32 headings for highlighting, 242,
articles in, 41, 61, 530 244
capitalization of, 41, 61, 95, 391, trade journal articles, 533–37. See also
530 articles in periodicals
colons in, 75 abstracts for, 7
coordinating conjunctions in, 61, 95, gathering data, 534–35
530 literature reviews in, 311
formatting, 530–32 obtaining publication clearance for,
in headers or footers, 241, 298 537
importance of, 529 online databases and indexes for,
italics for, 283–84, 531 461–62
memos, e-mails, and Internet organizing draft, 535
postings, 530 planning for, 534
newsletter articles, 343 preparing manuscript, 536–37
prepositions in, 61, 391, 530 sections and elements of, 535–36
question marks in, 436 style format for, 536–37
quotation marks for, 284, 444, 531 trade journals, job listings in, 290
reports and long documents, 197, train names, 284
202, 529–30 training manuals, 315–16
as rhetorical question, 490, 530 training requirements, in proposals,
setting tone with, 529, 533 421, 429

=== Page 654 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 621
Index 621
transitions, 537–39 unabridged dictionaries, 124
between paragraphs, 538–39 underlining
between sentences, 538 for emphasis, 169
clarity and, 68 for italics, 283
coherence and, 72 uninterested / disinterested, 126
commas with, 79 unique / perfect / equal, 176–77
conjunctions as, 95 unity, 543
eliminating in telegraphic style, 522 clarity and, 68
enumeration for, 370, 537, 538 in paragraphs, 370
for garbled sentences, 225 revising for, 488
methods of, 537–38 transitions and, 539, 543
in narratives, 339 unpublished data, documenting, 136
outlining and, 363 unsolicited proposals, 414
for paragraph coherence, 370 up, 391, 543
in presentations, 395 upon / on / onto, 357
in process explanations, 401 uppercase letters. Seeall-capital letters
for quotations, 447 us / our / ours, 376, 406
repeating keywords, 453, 537, 538 usability engineering, 543n
revising for, 488, 539 usability testing, 543–45
semicolons with, 497 for forms, 220
unity and, 543 for global graphics, 232
for Web writing, 571 for instructions, 263
words and phrases for, 537–38 main goals of, 544
transitive verbs, 293, 356, 549 for manuals, 318
transmittals, 111. See alsocover letters methods for, 544–45
transparencies, overhead, 396 for Web design, 562, 563
trip reports, 539–40 usage, 545
chronological order for, 68 clarity and, 70
sample of, 540 dictionaries on, 123
scope of, 493 grammar and, 234–35
trouble reports, 541–42 Web resources for, 545
chronological order for, 68, 331 user-centered design (UCD), 543n
ethics in writing for, 542 user manuals, 315
samples of, 69, 541–42 user testing, 544
try to, 542 utilize, 545
tutorials, 315
Twain, Mark, 568 vague words, 70, 546
two / to / too, 532 clichés as, 71
type / sort / kind, 13–14, 29 as gobbledygook, 233
typographical errors, checking for, 489 impreciseness of, 568
typography, 296–98. See also vendor description, in proposals, 431,
highlighting devices 457
for brochures, 57 vendor qualifications, in requests for
for electronic résumés, 487 proposals, 457–58
for e-mail, 163–64 verb tense. Seetense
for emphasis, 297–98 verbals, 546–48
for presentations, 297, 398 ESL tips for, 171
typeface and type size, 296–97 gerunds, 546–47
in Web design, 563, 572 infinitives, 547–48

=== Page 655 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 622
622 Index
verbals (continued) ethical considerations, 153, 155,
as nonfinite verbs, 550 236, 380, 395, 553, 556
participles, 548 in executive summaries, 181
in sentence fragments, 504 flowcharts, 192–94, 555
verbs, 549–52. See alsomood; subject- for global communication, 230–32,
verb agreement; tense; voice 260
adding upto, 543 graphs, 235–40, 554–55
adjectival forms, 15 guidelines for selecting, 554–55
agreement with subject, 24–27, 550, icons, 299–300
551 indexing, 251
conjugation of, 552 for instructions, 258, 260
converting into adjectives, 505 integrating with text, 553–56
ESL tips for, 502 labels and captions for, 122, 157,
finite and nonfinite, 550 300, 379
forms of, 550 layout and design for, 299–300
intransitive, 293, 549–50 list of figures and tables, 197, 419,
linking, 549–50 557
for manuals, 317–18 for manuals, 316, 318
mood of, 336–38 maps, 319–20, 554
phrases as, 380, 383 for newsletters, 155, 240, 299, 343,
plurals of, 351–52 345
as predicates, 500 numbering, 197, 355, 379, 519
with prepositions, 390 organizational charts, 362, 555
problems with missing, 504 outlining and, 154, 361–62, 364
properties of, 550–52 photographs, 377–80, 554
tense of, 523–26 for presentations, 395–98
transitive, 293, 356, 549 references to, 6
types of, 549–50 in spatial descriptions, 510
using simple and direct, 317–18 symbols and icons, 555
voice of, 557–60 tables, 519–21, 554
weak, 346 in technical writing, 522
very, 552 in trade journal articles, 536, 537
via, 552 types of, 553
videoconferencing, 496 for Web design, 563, 571
videos, documenting, 135, 141, 148 for white papers, 566
viruses writer’s checklist for, 556–57
in e-mail, 164 voice, 552, 557–60. See alsoactive
in instant messaging, 258 voice; passive voice
visual logic, in page design, 298 active voice, 558–59
visuals, 552–57 avoiding shifts in, 551
in appendixes, 35 ESL tips for, 560
boxes for, 300 helping verbs and, 550
in brochures, 56 passive voice, 559–60
for description, 122 in presentations, 400, 401
in dictionaries, 123 voice mail, 496
documenting and copyright of, 136,
149, 153, 155, 380, 395, 520, wait for / wait on, 561
556 warnings
drawings, 154–58, 554 exclamation marks for, 181

=== Page 656 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 623
Index 623
in instructions, 260–63 for maps, 320
italics for, 298 for memos, 329
in manuals, 319 occupational resources, 291
sample of, 262 online surveys, 438
we for prepositional idioms, 248
in technical writing, 385–86 for presentation slides, 396
us / our / ours, 376, 406 for punctuation, 434
weak verbs, 346. See also for requests for proposals, 458
nominalizations; voice for résumés, 481
Web addresses, 246, 509 for salary information, 492
Web content-management systems, 97 for sales proposals, 421
Web design, 561–63. See alsowriting for sending e-mail attachments, 164
for the Web for style manuals, 153, 515, 545
audience and purpose in, 561–62 for Web design, 561
forms, 218–23 for white papers, 567
hyperlinks in, 571–72 for word choice, 569
icons, 299–300 Web sites. See alsoInternet
for people with disabilities, 562 APA documentation of, 134
posting documents, 573 copyrighted materials from, 101,
privacy statements, 573 102
for résumés, 486 for current information sources, 460
testing, 562, 563 evaluating, 467
typography for, 297, 572 FAQs on, 183–85
using repurposed content for, 456 functions of, 496–97
visuals for, 379 IEEE documentation of, 140–41
Web resources for, 561 indexes for, 251
writer’s checklist for, 563 internal and external, 562
writing for the Web, 570–74 italics for titles, 531
Web resources MLA documentation of, 147
for abbreviations and acronyms, 5 posting résumés on, 289, 486–87
for affectation, 22 white papers on, 565
for argument, 314 Web subject directories, 465
for avoiding plagiarism, 384 Webster’s Third New International
blogs, 49–52 Dictionary,Unabridged, 124
for brochures, 57 well / good, 234
for buzzwords, 58 when / where / that, 564
for conjugation of verbs, 552 when and if, 564
for content management, 98 where / that, 564
dictionaries, 124 where . . . at, 564
for environmental impact statements, whether, 564
176 whether . . . or, 96
for ESL skills, 172 which
for ethical codes, 179 dual function of, 406
for evaluating sources, 467 for nonrestrictive clauses, 471, 527
for feasibility reports, 188 number agreement with, 26
for global communication, 230, 269 which / who / that, 26, 527–29
for grammar, 234 while, 564–65
for job searches, 289 white papers, 565–67
for layout and design, 300 getting clearances for, 567

=== Page 657 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 624
624 Index
white papers (continued) outdated words, 22
interesting-detail openings for, 278 revising for, 489
layout and design for, 566 standard vs. nonstandard English,
major sections for, 566–67 173–74
persuasion in, 565 thesaurus for, 529
preparation for, 565–66 tone and, 533
Web resources for, 567 usage conventions and, 234–35,
white space, in page design, 299, 301. 545
See alsospacing vague words, 546
whiteboard software, 324 Web resources for, 569
whiteboards, 396 word divisions
who, one of those..., 357–58 in dictionaries, 123
who / that / which, 26, 527–29 hyphens in, 246–47
who / whom, 25, 26, 567 word meanings. See alsodefinitions
who / whom / what / which, 406 capitalization and, 59
who / whom / which / that, 406 connotation / denotation in, 96
whole-by-whole method of dictionaries for, 123–25
comparison, 85, 86 word order. See alsosentence
who’s / whose / of which, 568 construction
widows, 299 emphasis and, 498–99, 502
Wikipedia, 102, 384, 462, 466 for sentence variety, 506
wikis, 497 subject-verb-object pattern, 499,
for collaborative writing, 72 501–2, 518
documenting, 135, 148 syntax, 518
will / shall, 508, 525 word-processing software. See
WinZip, 164 computer technology; Digital Tips
-wise, 568 wordiness. See alsoconciseness
with regard to / regarding, 453 affectation and, 22
word choice, 568–69 causes of, 90–91
abstract / concrete words, 6–7 of passive voice, 92, 558–59
in adjustment letters, 18 rambling sentences, 503–4
affectation and, 22 revising for, 489
ambiguity and, 32–33, 70 using that, 527
buzzwords, 57–58 wordy phrases, 41, 92, 183, 249–50,
clarity and, 70 341, 381
clichés, 71 words used as words
colloquialisms, 173 italics for, 284
connotation / denotation and, 96 plurals of, 34
deceptive language, 178, 377, 386 work plan, in proposals, 421
dictionaries for, 123–25, 569 work schedules, in proposals, 433
ethics in writing and, 178 works-cited list (MLA), 48, 131. See
figures of speech, 189–91 alsodocumenting sources; MLA
for global communication, 265–69 documentation
gobbledygook, 233 documentation models for, 145–50
idioms, 248 in formal reports, 199
jargon, 285 sample page, 152, 217
localisms and slang, 173–74 Workscope Description, in requests for
malapropisms, 315 proposals, 457

=== Page 658 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 625
Index 625
Writer’s Checklist writing ethically, 179
achieving conciseness, 91–92 writing executive summaries, 181
communicating globally, 229–30 writing instructions, 263
correspondence and accuracy, writing international
110–11 correspondence, 269–70
creating and integrating visuals, writing job descriptions, 286
556–57 writing newsletter articles, 343
creating and using drawings, 157 writing persuasive proposals, 417
creating and using maps, 319 writing a draft, 569–70. See alsodraft
creating graphs, 239–40 writing
designing a brochure, 57 writing block, in forms, 223
designing a questionnaire, 442–43 writing for the Web, 570–74. See also
designing Web pages, 563 Web design
developing an effective style, 515 documenting sources, 573
developing an FAQ, 185 ethics in writing for, 570–71, 573
eliminating awkwardness, 44 fonts, 572
evaluating print and online sources, for global audiences, 572
466–67 graphics, 571
indexing, 252–53 headings, 571
instant messaging privacy and hyperlinks, 571–72
security, 258 keywords, 571
interviewing successfully, 271 line length, 572
managing your e-mail and reducing lists, 571
overload, 166–67 organizational blogs, 51–52
observing workplace netiquette, posting documents, 573
163 privacy statements, 573
planning and conducting meetings, writing line, in forms, 223
328 writing process
preparing for and delivering a brainstorming, 53–54
presentation, 400–401 checklist for, xxiii–xxiv
preparing manuals, 318–19 for content management, 97
preparing minutes of meetings, five steps for success in, xv–xxii
333–34 writing a draft, 569–70
preparing to write, 389–90 writing style
proofreading in stages, 411 for abstracts, 9
revising your draft, 488–89 for correspondence, 103
taking notes, 348 for e-mail, 163, 173
using abbreviations, 3 for environmental impact statements,
using headings, 244 175–76
using hyphens to divide words, formal, 513–14
246–47 for global communication, 265–70
using lists, 310 informal, 514–15
using search engines and keywords, for instructions, 259–60
464 for newsletters, 341
using tone to build goodwill, 105 plain-language laws and, 176
using visuals in presentations, 398 standard vs. nonstandard English,
writing a rough draft, 570 173–74
writing collaboratively, 74–75 technical, 521–22

=== Page 659 ===
HTW_Indx.qxp 8/22/08 4:07 PM Page 626
626 Index
writing style (continued) yes, commas with, 78
using contractions, 101 “you” viewpoint, 42, 575–76
for Web writing, 571 in correspondence, 104–5
WWW Virtual Library, 465 in FAQs, 185
in persuasive writing, 377
Yahoo!, 464 in white papers, 565
years. See alsodates you / your / yours, 376, 406
format for writing, 81–82, 115 your / you’re, 576
plurals of, 34

=== Page 660 ===
HTW_MisU.qxp 8/22/08 4:15 PM Page 627
Commonly Misused Words and Phrases
A compose/constitute/comprise 90
a/an 1 consensus 97
a lot 2 continual/continuous 99
above 6 credible/creditable 114
absolutely 6 criteria/criterion 116
accept/except 9 critique 116
accuracy/precision 11
activate/actuate 12 D
ad hoc 13
data 119
adapt/adept/adopt 13
defective/deficient 120
affect/effect 23
definite/definitive 121
affinity 26
despite/in spite of 125
all ready/already 32
diagnosis/prognosis 127
all right 32
differ from/differ with 130
all together/altogether 33
different from/different than 130
allude/elude/refer 33
discreet/discrete 130
allusion/illusion 34
disinterested/uninterested 130
almost/most 34
due to/because of 162
also 34
amount/number 36
E
and/or 36
each 163
as/because/since 44
economic/economical 163
as much as/more than 45
e.g./i.e. 163
as such 45
equal/unique/perfect 177
as well as 45
etc. 178
augment/supplement 46
everybody/everyone 181
average/median/mean 46
explicit/implicit 185
awhile/a while 46
B F
bad/badly 48 fact 187
be sure to 48 female/male 190
beside/besides 48 few/a few 191
between/among 48 fewer/less 191
between you and me 49 figuratively/literally 191
bi-/semi- 49 fine 193
biannual/biennial 49 first/firstly 193
both...and 52 flammable/inflammable/
nonflammable 194
C forceful/forcible 196
foreword/forward 197
can/may 59
former/latter 220
cannot 59
fortuitous/fortunate 226
center on 68
cite/sight/site 68
compare/contrast 84 G
complement/compliment 87 good/well 238
627

=== Page 661 ===
HTW_MisU.qxp 8/22/08 4:15 PM Page 628
628 Commonly Misused Words and Phrases
H percent/percentage 373
he/she 246 phenomenon/phenomena 376
principal/principle 401
I pseudo-/quasi- 433
illegal/illicit 253
imply/infer 253 Q
in/into 253 quid pro quo 442
in order to 253
in terms of 254 R
indiscreet/indiscrete 257 raise/rise 447
individual 257 re 447
inside/inside of 259 really 449
insoluble/insolvable 260 reason is [because] 449
insure/ensure/assure 266 regarding/with regard to 453
interface 267 regardless 453
its/it’s 287 respective/respectively 472
S
K
service 511
kind of/sort of 294
set/sit 511
know-how 294
shall/will 512
so/so that/such 513
L
some/somewhat 513
lay/lie 295
some time/sometime/sometimes 514
lend/loan 303
strata/stratum 517
like/as 304
loose/lose 311
T
tenant/tenet 527
M
that/which/who 531
maybe/may be 319
there/their/they’re 533
media/medium 319
to/too/two 536
Ms./Miss/Mrs. 336
try to 546
mutual/common 337
U
N
up 547
nature 340
utilize 549
needless to say 340
none 345 V
nor/or 345 very 558
via 558
O
OK/okay 356 W
on/onto/upon 356 wait for/wait on 567
one 356 when/where/that 573
one of those...who 356 whether 574
only 357 while 574
outside [of] 364 who/whom 577
over [with] 364 who’s/whose/of which 577
-wise 578
P
party 372 Y
per 372 your/you’re 585

=== Page 662 ===
HTW_fm01.qxp 8/22/08 8:52 AM Page ii

=== Page 663 ===
HTW_Last.qxp 8/22/08 4:16 PM Page 630
Model Documents and Figures by Topic
Use the following list as a quick reference for finding selected samples of
technical writing and visuals by topic. See also the complete Contents by
Topic on the inside front cover of this book. For additional model docu-
ments, see the companion Web site at bedfordstmartins.com/alredtech.
Technical Writing Documents F–7 Online Form with Typical
and Elements Components 220
G–3 Graphics for U.S. and Global
A–2 Informative Abstract
Audiences 231
(for an Article) 8
G–4 International Organization
B–3 Brochure (Cover Panel) 55
for Standardization Symbols 231
B–4 Brochure (Inside Panels) 56
G–5 Double-line Graph
F–1 Feasibility Report 186 (with Shading) 235
F–5 Formal Report 201 G–6 Distorted and Distortion-Free
I–5 Illustrated Instructions 261 Expressions of Data 236
I–6 Warning in a Set G–7 Bar Graph (Quantities
of Instructions 262 of Different Items During
I–10 Investigative Report 282 a Fixed Period) 237
J–1 Job Description 287 G–8 Bar (Column) Graph (Showing
the Parts That Make Up
L–1 Laboratory Report 294
the Whole) 237
L–8 Literature Review 311
G–9 Pie Graph (Showing Percentages
N–2 Newsletter Article 342
of the Whole) 238
N–3 Company Newsletter
G–10Picture Graph 239
(Front Page) 344
H–2 Headings Used
P–4 Progress Report 403
in a Document 243
P–5 Activity Report 404
M–1 Map 320
P–7 Special Purpose Internal
T–1 Elements of a Table 520
Proposal 415
V–1 Chart for Choosing Appropriate
P–8 Sales Proposal 422
Visuals 554
Q–1 Questionnaire 439
T–4 Test Report 528
Correspondence
T–5 Trip Report Sent as E-mail
(with Attachment) 540 A–5 Acknowledgment 11
T–6 Trouble Report (Using Printed A–6 Adjustment Letter (When
Memo) 541 Company Is at Fault) 17
A–7 Partial Adjustment
Design and Visuals (Accompanying a Product) 18
C–6 Complaint Letter 88
D–14Schematic Diagram 158
C–8 A Poor Bad-News Message 106
F–2 Flowchart Using Labeled
Blocks 192 C–9 A Courteous Bad-News
Message 107
F–3 Flowchart Using Pictorial
Symbols 193 C–10A Good-News Message 108
F–4 Common ISO Flowchart Symbols C–11Cover Message 111
(with Annotations) 193 I–2 Inquiry 254
F–6 Form (for a Medical Claim) 219 I–3 Response to an Inquiry 255

=== Page 664 ===
HWC_IBC.qxp_jt 7/29/08 7:50 AM Page 101
I–7 Inappropriate International R–10Advanced Résumé (Combining
Correspondence (Draft Marked Functional and Chronological
for Revision) 266 Elements) 478
I–8 Appropriate International R–11Electronic Résumé (in ASCII
Correspondence 267 Format) 480
L–4 Full-Block-Style Letter
(with Letterhead) 302 Presentations and Meetings
L–5 Modified-Block-Style Letter
M–2 Meeting Agenda 325
(Without Letterhead) 303
M–3 E-mail to Accompany
M–4 Typical Memo Format
an Agenda 326
(Printed with Sender’s
M–6 Minutes of a Meeting 333
Handwritten Initials) 330
P–3 Slides for a Presentation 397
R–1 Reference Letter 450
R–2 Refusal Letter
Research and Documentation
(Sent as E-mail) 451
D–5 APA Sample Page 137
Job Search and Application D–6 APA Sample List
of References 138
A–3 Acceptance Letter
(for Employment) 10 D–7 IEEE Sample Page 143
A–4 Refusal Letter D–8 IEEE Sample Bibliography 144
(for Employment) 10 D–9 MLA Sample Page 151
A–8 Application Letter Sent as E-mail D–10MLA Sample List of Works
(College Student Applying Cited 152
for an Internship) 36 Q–1 Questionnaire 439
A–9 Application Letter (Recent Q–2 Long Quotation (APA Style) 447
Graduate Applying for a
Graphic Design Job) 37
Organization,Writing,
A–10Application Letter (Applicant
and Revision
with Years of Experience) 38
I–9 Follow-up Correspondence 276 B–1 Corporate Blog 50
R–3 Resignation Letter (to Accept C–2 Chronological Method
a Better Position) 468 of Development 69
R–4 Resignation Memo (Under G–1 General-to-Specific Method
Negative Conditions) 469 of Development 227
R–5 Student Résumé (for an Entry- G–2 Specific-to-General Method
Level Position) 473 of Development 228
R–6 Résumé (Highlighting N–1 Narration from an Accident
Professional Credentials) 474 Report 340
R–7 Student Résumé (for a Graphic O–1 Decreasing Order-of-Importance
Design Job) 475 Method of Development 359
R–8 Résumé (Applicant with O–2 Increasing Order-of-Importance
Management Experience) 476 Method of Development 360
R–9 Advanced Résumé (Showing P–1 Persuasive Memo 378
Promotion Within a Single S–1 Spatial Method of
Company) 477 Development 511
